_etymology. (supplied by a late consumptive usher to a grammar school.)the pale usher_threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain; i see himnow. he was ever dusting his old lexicons and grammars, with a queerhandkerchief, mockingly embellished with all the gay flags of allthe known nations of the world. he loved to dust his old grammars; itsomehow mildly reminded him of his mortality."while you take in hand to school others, and to teach them by whatname a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue, leaving out, throughignorance, the letter h, which almost alone maketh up the significationof the word, you deliver that which is not true." _hackluyt."whale. * * * sw. and dan. hval. this animal is named from roundnessor rolling; for in dan. hvalt is arched or vaulted." _webster'sdictionary."whale. * * * it is more immediately from the dut. and ger. wallen;a.s. walwian, to roll, to wallow." _richardson's dictionary. __, hebrew. _____, greek. cetus, latin. wh_l, anglo-saxon. hvalt, danish. wal, dutch. hwal, swedish. whale, icelandic. whale, english. baleine, french. ballena, spanish. pekee-nuee-nuee, fegee. pehee-nuee-nuee, erromangoan.extracts. (supplied by a sub-sub-librarian).it will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grub-worm of apoor devil of a sub-sub appears to have gone through the long vaticansand street-stalls of the earth, picking up whatever random allusions towhales he could anyways find in any book whatsoever, sacred orprofane. therefore you must not, in every case at least, take thehiggledy-piggledy whale statements, however authentic, in theseextracts, for veritable gospel cetology. far from it. as touching theancient authors generally, as well as the poets here appearing, theseextracts are solely valuable or entertaining, as affording a glancingbird's eye view of what has been promiscuously said, thought, fancied,and sung of leviathan, by many nations and generations, including ourown.so fare thee well, poor devil of a sub-sub, whose commentator i am. thoubelongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which no wine of this worldwill ever warm; and for whom even pale sherry would be too rosy-strong;but with whom one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too;and grow convivial upon tears; and say to them bluntly, with full eyesand empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant sadness_giveit up, sub-subs! for by how much the more pains ye take to please theworld, by so much the more shall ye for ever go thankless! would thati could clear out hampton court and the tuileries for ye! but gulp downyour tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts; for yourfriends who have gone before are clearing out the seven-storied heavens,and making refugees of long-pampered gabriel, michael, andraphael, against your coming. here ye strike but splintered heartstogether_there, ye shall strike unsplinterable glasses! extracts."and god created great whales." _genesis."leviathan maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deepto be hoary." _job."now the lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up jonah."_jonah."there go the ships; there is that leviathan whom thou hast made toplay therein." _psalms."in that day, the lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword,shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crookedserpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea." _isaiah."and what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos of thismonster's mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it goes allincontinently that foul great swallow of his, and perisheth in thebottomless gulf of his paunch." _holland's plutarch's morals."the indian sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes that are:among which the whales and whirlpooles called balaene, take up as muchin length as four acres or arpens of land." _holland's pliny."scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when about sunrisea great many whales and other monsters of the sea, appeared. amongthe former, one was of a most monstrous size.... this came towards us,open-mouthed, raising the waves on all sides, and beating the sea beforehim into a foam." _tooke's lucian. "the true history.""he visited this country also with a view of catching horse-whales,which had bones of very great value for their teeth, of which he broughtsome to the king.... the best whales were catched in his own country, ofwhich some were forty-eight, some fifty yards long. he said that he wasone of six who had killed sixty in two days." _other or other'sverbal narrative taken down from his mouth by king alfred, a.d. 890."and whereas all the other things, whether beast or vessel, thatenter into the dreadful gulf of this monster's (whale's) mouth, areimmediately lost and swallowed up, the sea-gudgeon retires into itin great security, and there sleeps." _montaigne. _apology forraimond sebond."let us fly, let us fly! old nick take me if is not leviathandescribed by the noble prophet moses in the life of patient job."_rabelais."this whale's liver was two cartloads." _stowe's annals."the great leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like boilingpan." _lord bacon's version of the psalms."touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we have receivednothing certain. they grow exceeding fat, insomuch that an incrediblequantity of oil will be extracted out of one whale." _ibid."history of life and death.""the sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an inwardbruise." _king henry."very like a whale." _hamlet. "which to secure, no skill of leach's art mote him availle, but to returne againe to his wound's worker, that with lowly dart, dinting his breast, had bred his restless paine, like as the wounded whale to shore flies thro' the maine." _the faerie queen."immense as whales, the motion of whose vast bodies can in a peacefulcalm trouble the ocean till it boil." _sir william davenant. prefaceto gondibert."what spermacetti is, men might justly doubt, since the learnedhosmannus in his work of thirty years, saith plainly, nescio quidsit." _sir t. browne. of sperma ceti and the sperma ceti whale. videhis v. e. "like spencer's talus with his modern flail he threatens ruin with his ponderous tail. ... their fixed jav'lins in his side he wears, and on his back a grove of pikes appears." _waller's battle of the summer islands."by art is created that great leviathan, called a commonwealthor state_(in latin, civitas) which is but an artificial man."_opening sentence of hobbes's leviathan."silly mansoul swallowed it without chewing, as if it had been a spratin the mouth of a whale." _pilgrim's progress. "that sea beast leviathan, which god of all his works created hugest that swim the ocean stream." _paradise lost. _-"there leviathan, hugest of living creatures, in the deep stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims, and seems a moving land; and at his gills draws in, and at his breath spouts out a sea." _ibid."the mighty whales which swim in a sea of water, and have a sea of oilswimming in them." _fuller's profane and holy state. "so close behind some promontory lie the huge leviathan to attend their prey, and give no chance, but swallow in the fry, which through their gaping jaws mistake the way." _dryden's annus mirabilis."while the whale is floating at the stern of the ship, they cut offhis head, and tow it with a boat as near the shore as it will come;but it will be aground in twelve or thirteen feet water." _thomasedge's ten voyages to spitzbergen, in purchas."in their way they saw many whales sporting in the ocean, and inwantonness fuzzing up the water through their pipes and vents, whichnature has placed on their shoulders." _sir t. herbert's voyagesinto asia and africa. harris coll."here they saw such huge troops of whales, that they were forced toproceed with a great deal of caution for fear they should run their shipupon them." _schouten's sixth circumnavigation."we set sail from the elbe, wind n.e. in the ship called thejonas-in-the-whale.... some say the whale can't open his mouth, butthat is a fable.... they frequently climb up the masts to see whetherthey can see a whale, for the first discoverer has a ducat for hispains.... i was told of a whale taken near shetland, that had above abarrel of herrings in his belly.... one of our harpooneers told me thathe caught once a whale in spitzbergen that was white all over." _avoyage to greenland, a.d. 1671. harris coll."several whales have come in upon this coast (fife) anno 1652, oneeighty feet in length of the whale-bone kind came in, which (as i wasinformed), besides a vast quantity of oil, did afford 500 weight ofbaleen. the jaws of it stand for a gate in the garden of pitferren."_sibbald's fife and kinross."myself have agreed to try whether i can master and kill thissperma-ceti whale, for i could never hear of any of that sort that waskilled by any man, such is his fierceness and swiftness." _richardstrafford's letter from the bermudas. phil. trans. a.d. 1668."whales in the sea god's voice obey." _n. e. primer."we saw also abundance of large whales, there being more in thosesouthern seas, as i may say, by a hundred to one; than we have to thenorthward of us." _captain cowley's voyage round the globe, a.d.1729."... and the breath of the whale is frequently attended with suchan insupportable smell, as to bring on a disorder of the brain."_ulloa's south america. "to fifty chosen sylphs of special note, we trust the important charge, the petticoat. oft have we known that seven-fold fence to fail, tho' stuffed with hoops and armed with ribs of whale." _rape of the lock."if we compare land animals in respect to magnitude, with thosethat take up their abode in the deep, we shall find they will appearcontemptible in the comparison. the whale is doubtless the largestanimal in creation." _goldsmith, nat. hist."if you should write a fable for little fishes, you would make themspeak like great wales." _goldsmith to johnson."in the afternoon we saw what was supposed to be a rock, but it wasfound to be a dead whale, which some asiatics had killed, and were thentowing ashore. they seemed to endeavor to conceal themselves behind thewhale, in order to avoid being seen by us." _cook's voyages."the larger whales, they seldom venture to attack. they stand in sogreat dread of some of them, that when out at sea they are afraid tomention even their names, and carry dung, lime-stone, juniper-wood,and some other articles of the same nature in their boats, in order toterrify and prevent their too near approach." _uno von troil'sletters on banks's and solander's voyage to iceland in 1772."the spermacetti whale found by the nantuckois, is an active, fierceanimal, and requires vast address and boldness in the fishermen."_thomas jefferson's whale memorial to the french minister in 1778."and pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it?" _edmundburke's reference in parliament to the nantucket whale-fishery."spain_a great whale stranded on the shores of europe." _edmundburke. (somewhere.)"a tenth branch of the king's ordinary revenue, said to be groundedon the consideration of his guarding and protecting the seas frompirates and robbers, is the right to royal fish, which are whale andsturgeon. and these, when either thrown ashore or caught near the coast,are the property of the king." _blackstone. "soon to the sport of death the crews repair: rodmond unerring o'er his head suspends the barbed steel, and every turn attends." _falconer's shipwreck. "bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires, and rockets blew self driven, to hang their momentary fire around the vault of heaven. "so fire with water to compare, the ocean serves on high, up-spouted by a whale in air, to express unwieldy joy." _cowper, on the queen's visit to london."ten or fifteen gallons of blood are thrown out of the heart at astroke, with immense velocity." _john hunter's account of thedissection of a whale. (a small sized one.)"the aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main pipe ofthe water-works at london bridge, and the water roaring in its passagethrough that pipe is inferior in impetus and velocity to the bloodgushing from the whale's heart." _paley's theology."the whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet." _baroncuvier."in 40 degrees south, we saw spermacetti whales, but did not takeany till the first of may, the sea being then covered with them."_colnett's voyage for the purpose of extending the spermaceti whalefishery. "in the free element beneath me swam, floundered and dived, in play, in chace, in battle, fishes of every colour, form, and kind; which language cannot paint, and mariner had never seen; from dread leviathan to insect millions peopling every wave: gather'd in shoals immense, like floating islands, led by mysterious instincts through that waste and trackless region, though on every side assaulted by voracious enemies, whales, sharks, and monsters, arm'd in front or jaw, with swords, saws, spiral horns, or hooked fangs." _montgomery's world before the flood. "io! paean! io! sing. to the finny people's king. not a mightier whale than this in the vast atlantic is; not a fatter fish than he, flounders round the polar sea." _charles lamb's triumph of the whale."in the year 1690 some persons were on a high hill observing thewhales spouting and sporting with each other, when one observed:there_pointing to the sea_is a green pasture where our children'sgrand-children will go for bread." _obed macy's history ofnantucket."i built a cottage for susan and myself and made a gateway in theform of a gothic arch, by setting up a whale's jaw bones."_hawthorne's twice told tales."she came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who had beenkilled by a whale in the pacific ocean, no less than forty years ago."_ibid."no, sir, _tis a right whale," answered tom; "i saw his sprout;he threw up a pair of as pretty rainbows as a christian would wish tolook at. he's a raal oil-butt, that fellow!" _cooper's pilot."the papers were brought in, and we saw in the berlin gazette thatwhales had been introduced on the stage there." _eckermann'sconversations with goethe."my god! mr. chace, what is the matter?" i answered, "we have beenstove by a whale." _"narrative of the shipwreck of the whale shipessex of nantucket, which was attacked and finally destroyed by a largesperm whale in the pacific ocean." by owen chace of nantucket, firstmate of said vessel. new york, 1821. "a mariner sat in the shrouds one night, the wind was piping free; now bright, now dimmed, was the moonlight pale, and the phospher gleamed in the wake of the whale, as it floundered in the sea." _elizabeth oakes smith."the quantity of line withdrawn from the boats engaged in the captureof this one whale, amounted altogether to 10,440 yards or nearly sixenglish miles...."sometimes the whale shakes its tremendous tail in the air, which,cracking like a whip, resounds to the distance of three or fourmiles." _scoresby."mad with the agonies he endures from these fresh attacks, theinfuriated sperm whale rolls over and over; he rears his enormous head,and with wide expanded jaws snaps at everything around him; he rushesat the boats with his head; they are propelled before him with vastswiftness, and sometimes utterly destroyed.... it is a matter of greatastonishment that the consideration of the habits of so interesting,and, in a commercial point of view, so important an animal (as the spermwhale) should have been so entirely neglected, or should have excitedso little curiosity among the numerous, and many of them competentobservers, that of late years, must have possessed the most abundantand the most convenient opportunities of witnessing their habitudes."_thomas beale's history of the sperm whale, 1839."the cachalot" (sperm whale) "is not only better armed than thetrue whale" (greenland or right whale) "in possessing a formidableweapon at either extremity of its body, but also more frequentlydisplays a disposition to employ these weapons offensively and inmanner at once so artful, bold, and mischievous, as to lead to its beingregarded as the most dangerous to attack of all the known species of thewhale tribe." _frederick debell bennett's whaling voyage round theglobe, 1840. october 13. "there she blows," was sung out from the mast-head. "where away?" demanded the captain. "three points off the lee bow, sir." "raise up your wheel. steady!" "steady, sir." "mast-head ahoy! do you see that whale now?" "ay ay, sir! a shoal of sperm whales! there she blows! there she breaches!" "sing out! sing out every time!" "ay ay, sir! there she blows! there_there_thar she blows_bowes_bo-o-os!" "how far off?" "two miles and a half." "thunder and lightning! so near! call all hands." _j. ross browne's etchings of a whaling cruize. 1846."the whale-ship globe, on board of which vessel occurred thehorrid transactions we are about to relate, belonged to the island ofnantucket." _"narrative of the globe mutiny," by lay and husseysurvivors. a.d. 1828.being once pursued by a whale which he had wounded, he parried theassault for some time with a lance; but the furious monster at lengthrushed on the boat; himself and comrades only being preserved by leapinginto the water when they saw the onset was inevitable." _missionaryjournal of tyerman and bennett."nantucket itself," said mr. webster, "is a very striking andpeculiar portion of the national interest. there is a population ofeight or nine thousand persons living here in the sea, adding largelyevery year to the national wealth by the boldest and most perseveringindustry." _report of daniel webster's speech in the u. s. senate,on the application for the erection of a breakwater at nantucket. 1828."the whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him ina moment." _"the whale and his captors, or the whaleman'sadventures and the whale's biography, gathered on the homeward cruiseof the commodore preble." by rev. henry t. cheever."if you make the least damn bit of noise," replied samuel, "i willsend you to hell." _life of samuel comstock (the mutineer), byhis brother, william comstock. another version of the whale-ship globenarrative."the voyages of the dutch and english to the northern ocean, in order,if possible, to discover a passage through it to india, though theyfailed of their main object, laid-open the haunts of the whale."_mcculloch's commercial dictionary."these things are reciprocal; the ball rebounds, only to bound forwardagain; for now in laying open the haunts of the whale, the whalemen seemto have indirectly hit upon new clews to that same mystic north-westpassage." _from "something" unpublished."it is impossible to meet a whale-ship on the ocean without beingstruck by her near appearance. the vessel under short sail, withlook-outs at the mast-heads, eagerly scanning the wide expanse aroundthem, has a totally different air from those engaged in regularvoyage." _currents and whaling. u.s. ex. ex."pedestrians in the vicinity of london and elsewhere may recollecthaving seen large curved bones set upright in the earth, either to formarches over gateways, or entrances to alcoves, and they may perhaps havebeen told that these were the ribs of whales." _tales of a whalevoyager to the arctic ocean."it was not till the boats returned from the pursuit of these whales,that the whites saw their ship in bloody possession of the savagesenrolled among the crew." _newspaper account of the taking andretaking of the whale-ship hobomack."it is generally well known that out of the crews of whalingvessels (american) few ever return in the ships on board of which theydeparted." _cruise in a whale boat."suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and shot upperpendicularly into the air. it was the whale." _miriam coffin orthe whale fisherman."the whale is harpooned to be sure; but bethink you, how you wouldmanage a powerful unbroken colt, with the mere appliance of a rope tiedto the root of his tail." _a chapter on whaling in ribs and trucks."on one occasion i saw two of these monsters (whales) probably maleand female, slowly swimming, one after the other, within less than astone's throw of the shore" (terra del fuego), "over whichthe beech tree extended its branches." _darwin's voyage of anaturalist."_stern all!' exclaimed the mate, as upon turning his head, he sawthe distended jaws of a large sperm whale close to the head of theboat, threatening it with instant destruction;__stern all, for yourlives!'" _wharton the whale killer."so be cheery, my lads, let your hearts never fail, while the boldharpooneer is striking the whale!" _nantucket song. "oh, the rare old whale, mid storm and gale in his ocean home will be a giant in might, where might is right, and king of the boundless sea." _whale song.chapter 1. loomings.call me ishmael. some years ago_never mind how long precisely_havinglittle or no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me onshore, i thought i would sail about a little and see the watery part ofthe world. it is a way i have of driving off the spleen and regulatingthe circulation. whenever i find myself growing grim about the mouth;whenever it is a damp, drizzly november in my soul; whenever i findmyself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing upthe rear of every funeral i meet; and especially whenever my hypos getsuch an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle toprevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodicallyknocking people's hats off_then, i account it high time to get tosea as soon as i can. this is my substitute for pistol and ball. witha philosophical flourish cato throws himself upon his sword; i quietlytake to the ship. there is nothing surprising in this. if they but knewit, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish verynearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.there now is your insular city of the manhattoes, belted round bywharves as indian isles by coral reefs_commerce surrounds it withher surf. right and left, the streets take you waterward. its extremedowntown is the battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, andcooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of land.look at the crowds of water-gazers there.circumambulate the city of a dreamy sabbath afternoon. go from corlearshook to coenties slip, and from thence, by whitehall, northward. whatdo you see?_posted like silent sentinels all around the town, standthousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. someleaning against the spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; somelooking over the bulwarks of ships from china; some high aloft in therigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward peep. but theseare all landsmen; of week days pent up in lath and plaster_tied tocounters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. how then is this? arethe green fields gone? what do they here?but look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, andseemingly bound for a dive. strange! nothing will content them but theextremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonderwarehouses will not suffice. no. they must get just as nigh the wateras they possibly can without falling in. and there they stand_miles ofthem_leagues. inlanders all, they come from lanes and alleys, streetsand avenues_north, east, south, and west. yet here they all unite.tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses of allthose ships attract them thither?once more. say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes. takealmost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down in adale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream. there is magicin it. let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his deepestreveries_stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going, and hewill infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in all that region.should you ever be athirst in the great american desert, try thisexperiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysicalprofessor. yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded forever.but here is an artist. he desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest,quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley ofthe saco. what is the chief element he employs? there stand his trees,each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were within; andhere sleeps his meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up from yondercottage goes a sleepy smoke. deep into distant woodlands winds amazy way, reaching to overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in theirhill-side blue. but though the picture lies thus tranced, and thoughthis pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this shepherd'shead, yet all were vain, unless the shepherd's eye were fixed upon themagic stream before him. go visit the prairies in june, when for scoreson scores of miles you wade knee-deep among tiger-lilies_what is theone charm wanting?_water_there is not a drop of water there! wereniagara but a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles tosee it? why did the poor poet of tennessee, upon suddenly receiving twohandfuls of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadlyneeded, or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to rockaway beach? whyis almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him, atsome time or other crazy to go to sea? why upon your first voyage as apassenger, did you yourself feel such a mystical vibration, when firsttold that you and your ship were now out of sight of land? why did theold persians hold the sea holy? why did the greeks give it a separatedeity, and own brother of jove? surely all this is not without meaning.and still deeper the meaning of that story of narcissus, who becausehe could not grasp the tormenting, mild image he saw in the fountain,plunged into it and was drowned. but that same image, we ourselves seein all rivers and oceans. it is the image of the ungraspable phantom oflife; and this is the key to it all.now, when i say that i am in the habit of going to sea whenever i beginto grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my lungs,i do not mean to have it inferred that i ever go to sea as a passenger.for to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a purse isbut a rag unless you have something in it. besides, passengers getsea-sick_grow quarrelsome_don't sleep of nights_do not enjoythemselves much, as a general thing;_no, i never go as a passenger;nor, though i am something of a salt, do i ever go to sea as acommodore, or a captain, or a cook. i abandon the glory and distinctionof such offices to those who like them. for my part, i abominate allhonourable respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kindwhatsoever. it is quite as much as i can do to take care of myself,without taking care of ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not.and as for going as cook,_though i confess there is considerable gloryin that, a cook being a sort of officer on ship-board_yet, somehow,i never fancied broiling fowls;_though once broiled, judiciouslybuttered, and judgmatically salted and peppered, there is no one whowill speak more respectfully, not to say reverentially, of a broiledfowl than i will. it is out of the idolatrous dotings of the oldegyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that you see themummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids.no, when i go to sea, i go as a simple sailor, right before the mast,plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head.true, they rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar tospar, like a grasshopper in a may meadow. and at first, this sortof thing is unpleasant enough. it touches one's sense of honour,particularly if you come of an old established family in the land, thevan rensselaers, or randolphs, or hardicanutes. and more than all,if just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have beenlording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest boys standin awe of you. the transition is a keen one, i assure you, from aschoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of seneca andthe stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. but even this wears off intime.what of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broomand sweep down the decks? what does that indignity amount to, weighed,i mean, in the scales of the new testament? do you think the archangelgabriel thinks anything the less of me, because i promptly andrespectfully obey that old hunks in that particular instance? whoain't a slave? tell me that. well, then, however the old sea-captainsmay order me about_however they may thump and punch me about, i havethe satisfaction of knowing that it is all right; that everybody else isone way or other served in much the same way_either in a physicalor metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump ispassed round, and all hands should rub each other's shoulder-blades,and be content.again, i always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point ofpaying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a singlepenny that i ever heard of. on the contrary, passengers themselves mustpay. and there is all the difference in the world between payingand being paid. the act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortableinfliction that the two orchard thieves entailed upon us. but beingpaid,_what will compare with it? the urbane activity with which a manreceives money is really marvellous, considering that we so earnestlybelieve money to be the root of all earthly ills, and that on no accountcan a monied man enter heaven. ah! how cheerfully we consign ourselvesto perdition!finally, i always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesomeexercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck. for as in this world,head winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is,if you never violate the pythagorean maxim), so for the most part thecommodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand fromthe sailors on the forecastle. he thinks he breathes it first; but notso. in much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in manyother things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it.but wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea as amerchant sailor, i should now take it into my head to go on a whalingvoyage; this the invisible police officer of the fates, who has theconstant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me insome unaccountable way_he can better answer than any one else. and,doubtless, my going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grandprogramme of providence that was drawn up a long time ago. it came in asa sort of brief interlude and solo between more extensive performances.i take it that this part of the bill must have run something like this:"grand contested election for the presidency of the united states."whaling voyage by one ishmael. "bloody battle in affghanistan."though i cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, thefates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when otherswere set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short andeasy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces_thoughi cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that i recall all thecircumstances, i think i can see a little into the springs and motiveswhich being cunningly presented to me under various disguises, inducedme to set about performing the part i did, besides cajoling me into thedelusion that it was a choice resulting from my own unbiased freewilland discriminating judgment.chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the greatwhale himself. such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all mycuriosity. then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his islandbulk; the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with allthe attending marvels of a thousand patagonian sights and sounds, helpedto sway me to my wish. with other men, perhaps, such things would nothave been inducements; but as for me, i am tormented with an everlastingitch for things remote. i love to sail forbidden seas, and land onbarbarous coasts. not ignoring what is good, i am quick to perceive ahorror, and could still be social with it_would they let me_sinceit is but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of the placeone lodges in.by reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; thegreat flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wildconceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated intomy inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of themall, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.chapter 2. the carpet-bag.i stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm,and started for cape horn and the pacific. quitting the good city ofold manhatto, i duly arrived in new bedford. it was a saturday night indecember. much was i disappointed upon learning that the little packetfor nantucket had already sailed, and that no way of reaching that placewould offer, till the following monday.as most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop atthis same new bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as wellbe related that i, for one, had no idea of so doing. for my mind wasmade up to sail in no other than a nantucket craft, because there was afine, boisterous something about everything connected with that famousold island, which amazingly pleased me. besides though new bedford hasof late been gradually monopolising the business of whaling, and thoughin this matter poor old nantucket is now much behind her, yet nantucketwas her great original_the tyre of this carthage;_the placewhere the first dead american whale was stranded. where else but fromnantucket did those aboriginal whalemen, the red-men, first sally outin canoes to give chase to the leviathan? and where but from nantucket,too, did that first adventurous little sloop put forth, partly ladenwith imported cobblestones_so goes the story_to throw at the whales,in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon fromthe bowsprit?now having a night, a day, and still another night following before mein new bedford, ere i could embark for my destined port, it became amatter of concernment where i was to eat and sleep meanwhile. it was avery dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly coldand cheerless. i knew no one in the place. with anxious grapnels i hadsounded my pocket, and only brought up a few pieces of silver,_so,wherever you go, ishmael, said i to myself, as i stood in the middle ofa dreary street shouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom towards thenorth with the darkness towards the south_wherever in your wisdom youmay conclude to lodge for the night, my dear ishmael, be sure to inquirethe price, and don't be too particular.with halting steps i paced the streets, and passed the sign of "thecrossed harpoons"_but it looked too expensive and jolly there.further on, from the bright red windows of the "sword-fish inn,"there came such fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packedsnow and ice from before the house, for everywhere else the congealedfrost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic pavement,_rather wearyfor me, when i struck my foot against the flinty projections, becausefrom hard, remorseless service the soles of my boots were in a mostmiserable plight. too expensive and jolly, again thought i, pausing onemoment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds ofthe tinkling glasses within. but go on, ishmael, said i at last; don'tyou hear? get away from before the door; your patched boots are stoppingthe way. so on i went. i now by instinct followed the streets thattook me waterward, for there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not thecheeriest inns.such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand,and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. atthis hour of the night, of the last day of the week, that quarter ofthe town proved all but deserted. but presently i came to a smoky lightproceeding from a low, wide building, the door of which stood invitinglyopen. it had a careless look, as if it were meant for the uses of thepublic; so, entering, the first thing i did was to stumble over anash-box in the porch. ha! thought i, ha, as the flying particles almostchoked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city, gomorrah? but"the crossed harpoons," and "the sword-fish?"_this, then mustneeds be the sign of "the trap." however, i picked myself up andhearing a loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interiordoor.it seemed the great black parliament sitting in tophet. a hundred blackfaces turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black angelof doom was beating a book in a pulpit. it was a negro church; and thepreacher's text was about the blackness of darkness, and the weepingand wailing and teeth-gnashing there. ha, ishmael, muttered i, backingout, wretched entertainment at the sign of _the trap!'moving on, i at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks,and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a swingingsign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintly representinga tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words underneath_"thespouter inn:_peter coffin."coffin?_spouter?_rather ominous in that particular connexion,thought i. but it is a common name in nantucket, they say, and i supposethis peter here is an emigrant from there. as the light looked so dim,and the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidatedlittle wooden house itself looked as if it might have been carted herefrom the ruins of some burnt district, and as the swinging sign had apoverty-stricken sort of creak to it, i thought that here was the veryspot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea coffee.it was a queer sort of place_a gable-ended old house, one side palsiedas it were, and leaning over sadly. it stood on a sharp bleak corner,where that tempestuous wind euroclydon kept up a worse howling than everit did about poor paul's tossed craft. euroclydon, nevertheless, isa mighty pleasant zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the hobquietly toasting for bed. "in judging of that tempestuous wind calledeuroclydon," says an old writer_of whose works i possess the onlycopy extant_"it maketh a marvellous difference, whether thou lookestout at it from a glass window where the frost is all on the outside, orwhether thou observest it from that sashless window, where the frost ison both sides, and of which the wight death is the only glazier."true enough, thought i, as this passage occurred to my mind_oldblack-letter, thou reasonest well. yes, these eyes are windows, and thisbody of mine is the house. what a pity they didn't stop up the chinksand the crannies though, and thrust in a little lint here and there. butit's too late to make any improvements now. the universe is finished;the copestone is on, and the chips were carted off a million years ago.poor lazarus there, chattering his teeth against the curbstone for hispillow, and shaking off his tatters with his shiverings, he might plugup both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his mouth, and yet thatwould not keep out the tempestuous euroclydon. euroclydon! says olddives, in his red silken wrapper_(he had a redder one afterwards)pooh, pooh! what a fine frosty night; how orion glitters; what northernlights! let them talk of their oriental summer climes of everlastingconservatories; give me the privilege of making my own summer with myown coals.but what thinks lazarus? can he warm his blue hands by holding them upto the grand northern lights? would not lazarus rather be in sumatrathan here? would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along theline of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself, inorder to keep out this frost?now, that lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before thedoor of dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should bemoored to one of the moluccas. yet dives himself, he too lives like aczar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs, and being a president of atemperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears of orphans.but no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there isplenty of that yet to come. let us scrape the ice from our frosted feet,and see what sort of a place this "spouter" may be.chapter 3. the spouter-inn.entering that gable-ended spouter-inn, you found yourself in a wide,low, straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one ofthe bulwarks of some condemned old craft. on one side hung a very largeoilpainting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, that in theunequal crosslights by which you viewed it, it was only by diligentstudy and a series of systematic visits to it, and careful inquiry ofthe neighbors, that you could any way arrive at an understanding of itspurpose. such unaccountable masses of shades and shadows, that at firstyou almost thought some ambitious young artist, in the time of the newengland hags, had endeavored to delineate chaos bewitched. but by dintof much and earnest contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings, andespecially by throwing open the little window towards the back of theentry, you at last come to the conclusion that such an idea, howeverwild, might not be altogether unwarranted.but what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber, portentous,black mass of something hovering in the centre of the picture over threeblue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast. a boggy,soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive a nervous man distracted.yet was there a sort of indefinite, half-attained, unimaginablesublimity about it that fairly froze you to it, till you involuntarilytook an oath with yourself to find out what that marvellous paintingmeant. ever and anon a bright, but, alas, deceptive idea would dartyou through._it's the black sea in a midnight gale._it'sthe unnatural combat of the four primal elements._it's a blastedheath._it's a hyperborean winter scene._it's the breaking-up ofthe icebound stream of time. but at last all these fancies yielded tothat one portentous something in the picture's midst. that once foundout, and all the rest were plain. but stop; does it not bear a faintresemblance to a gigantic fish? even the great leviathan himself?in fact, the artist's design seemed this: a final theory of my own,partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with whomi conversed upon the subject. the picture represents a cape-horner in agreat hurricane; the half-foundered ship weltering there with its threedismantled masts alone visible; and an exasperated whale, purposing tospring clean over the craft, is in the enormous act of impaling himselfupon the three mast-heads.the opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenisharray of monstrous clubs and spears. some were thickly set withglittering teeth resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots ofhuman hair; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping roundlike the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armed mower. youshuddered as you gazed, and wondered what monstrous cannibal and savagecould ever have gone a death-harvesting with such a hacking, horrifyingimplement. mixed with these were rusty old whaling lances and harpoonsall broken and deformed. some were storied weapons. with this once longlance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years ago did nathan swain kill fifteenwhales between a sunrise and a sunset. and that harpoon_so like acorkscrew now_was flung in javan seas, and run away with by a whale,years afterwards slain off the cape of blanco. the original iron enterednigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body of aman, travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in thehump.crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way_cutthrough what in old times must have been a great central chimney withfireplaces all round_you enter the public room. a still duskier placeis this, with such low ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkledplanks beneath, that you would almost fancy you trod some old craft'scockpits, especially of such a howling night, when this corner-anchoredold ark rocked so furiously. on one side stood a long, low, shelf-liketable covered with cracked glass cases, filled with dusty raritiesgathered from this wide world's remotest nooks. projecting from thefurther angle of the room stands a dark-looking den_the bar_a rudeattempt at a right whale's head. be that how it may, there stands thevast arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, a coach might almostdrive beneath it. within are shabby shelves, ranged round with olddecanters, bottles, flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction, likeanother cursed jonah (by which name indeed they called him), bustles alittle withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells the sailorsdeliriums and death.abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison. thoughtrue cylinders without_within, the villanous green goggling glassesdeceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom. parallel meridiansrudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads' goblets. fillto this mark, and your charge is but a penny; to this a penny more; andso on to the full glass_the cape horn measure, which you may gulp downfor a shilling.upon entering the place i found a number of young seamen gathered abouta table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of skrimshander. isought the landlord, and telling him i desired to be accommodated witha room, received for answer that his house was full_not a bedunoccupied. "but avast," he added, tapping his forehead, "youhaint no objections to sharing a harpooneer's blanket, have ye? is'pose you are goin' a-whalin', so you'd better get used to thatsort of thing."i told him that i never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if i shouldever do so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, andthat if he (the landlord) really had no other place for me, and theharpooneer was not decidedly objectionable, why rather than wanderfurther about a strange town on so bitter a night, i would put up withthe half of any decent man's blanket."i thought so. all right; take a seat. supper?_you want supper?supper'll be ready directly."i sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on thebattery. at one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning it withhis jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at the spacebetween his legs. he was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, buthe didn't make much headway, i thought.at last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in anadjoining room. it was cold as iceland_no fire at all_the landlordsaid he couldn't afford it. nothing but two dismal tallow candles,each in a winding sheet. we were fain to button up our monkey jackets,and hold to our lips cups of scalding tea with our half frozen fingers.but the fare was of the most substantial kind_not only meat andpotatoes, but dumplings; good heavens! dumplings for supper! one youngfellow in a green box coat, addressed himself to these dumplings in amost direful manner."my boy," said the landlord, "you'll have the nightmare to adead sartainty.""landlord," i whispered, "that aint the harpooneer is it?""oh, no," said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, "theharpooneer is a dark complexioned chap. he never eats dumplings, hedon't_he eats nothing but steaks, and he likes _em rare.""the devil he does," says i. "where is that harpooneer? is hehere?""he'll be here afore long," was the answer.i could not help it, but i began to feel suspicious of this "darkcomplexioned" harpooneer. at any rate, i made up my mind that if it soturned out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get intobed before i did.supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing notwhat else to do with myself, i resolved to spend the rest of the eveningas a looker on.presently a rioting noise was heard without. starting up, the landlordcried, "that's the grampus's crew. i seed her reported in theoffing this morning; a three years' voyage, and a full ship. hurrah,boys; now we'll have the latest news from the feegees."a tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung open,and in rolled a wild set of mariners enough. enveloped in their shaggywatch coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen comforters, allbedarned and ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, they seemed aneruption of bears from labrador. they had just landed from their boat,and this was the first house they entered. no wonder, then, that theymade a straight wake for the whale's mouth_the bar_when thewrinkled little old jonah, there officiating, soon poured them outbrimmers all round. one complained of a bad cold in his head, upon whichjonah mixed him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses, which he sworewas a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs whatsoever, never mindof how long standing, or whether caught off the coast of labrador, or onthe weather side of an ice-island.the liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does evenwith the arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began caperingabout most obstreperously.i observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and thoughhe seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his ownsober face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as much noiseas the rest. this man interested me at once; and since the sea-godshad ordained that he should soon become my shipmate (though but asleeping-partner one, so far as this narrative is concerned), i willhere venture upon a little description of him. he stood full six feetin height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like a coffer-dam. i haveseldom seen such brawn in a man. his face was deeply brown and burnt,making his white teeth dazzling by the contrast; while in the deepshadows of his eyes floated some reminiscences that did not seem to givehim much joy. his voice at once announced that he was a southerner,and from his fine stature, i thought he must be one of those tallmountaineers from the alleghanian ridge in virginia. when the revelryof his companions had mounted to its height, this man slipped awayunobserved, and i saw no more of him till he became my comrade on thesea. in a few minutes, however, he was missed by his shipmates, andbeing, it seems, for some reason a huge favourite with them, they raiseda cry of "bulkington! bulkington! where's bulkington?" and dartedout of the house in pursuit of him.it was now about nine o'clock, and the room seeming almostsupernaturally quiet after these orgies, i began to congratulate myselfupon a little plan that had occurred to me just previous to the entranceof the seamen.no man prefers to sleep two in a bed. in fact, you would a good dealrather not sleep with your own brother. i don't know how it is, butpeople like to be private when they are sleeping. and when it comes tosleeping with an unknown stranger, in a strange inn, in a strangetown, and that stranger a harpooneer, then your objections indefinitelymultiply. nor was there any earthly reason why i as a sailor shouldsleep two in a bed, more than anybody else; for sailors no more sleeptwo in a bed at sea, than bachelor kings do ashore. to be sure theyall sleep together in one apartment, but you have your own hammock, andcover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in your own skin.the more i pondered over this harpooneer, the more i abominated thethought of sleeping with him. it was fair to presume that being aharpooneer, his linen or woollen, as the case might be, would not be ofthe tidiest, certainly none of the finest. i began to twitch all over.besides, it was getting late, and my decent harpooneer ought to behome and going bedwards. suppose now, he should tumble in upon me atmidnight_how could i tell from what vile hole he had been coming?"landlord! i've changed my mind about that harpooneer._i shan'tsleep with him. i'll try the bench here.""just as you please; i'm sorry i can't spare ye a tablecloth for amattress, and it's a plaguy rough board here"_feeling of the knotsand notches. "but wait a bit, skrimshander; i've got a carpenter'splane there in the bar_wait, i say, and i'll make ye snug enough."so saying he procured the plane; and with his old silk handkerchieffirst dusting the bench, vigorously set to planing away at my bed, thewhile grinning like an ape. the shavings flew right and left; tillat last the plane-iron came bump against an indestructible knot. thelandlord was near spraining his wrist, and i told him for heaven'ssake to quit_the bed was soft enough to suit me, and i did not knowhow all the planing in the world could make eider down of a pine plank.so gathering up the shavings with another grin, and throwing them intothe great stove in the middle of the room, he went about his business,and left me in a brown study.i now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot tooshort; but that could be mended with a chair. but it was a foot toonarrow, and the other bench in the room was about four inches higherthan the planed one_so there was no yoking them. i then placed thefirst bench lengthwise along the only clear space against the wall,leaving a little interval between, for my back to settle down in. but isoon found that there came such a draught of cold air over me from underthe sill of the window, that this plan would never do at all, especiallyas another current from the rickety door met the one from the window,and both together formed a series of small whirlwinds in the immediatevicinity of the spot where i had thought to spend the night.the devil fetch that harpooneer, thought i, but stop, couldn't i steala march on him_bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed, not to bewakened by the most violent knockings? it seemed no bad idea; but uponsecond thoughts i dismissed it. for who could tell but what the nextmorning, so soon as i popped out of the room, the harpooneer might bestanding in the entry, all ready to knock me down!still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance of spendinga sufferable night unless in some other person's bed, i began to thinkthat after all i might be cherishing unwarrantable prejudices againstthis unknown harpooneer. thinks i, i'll wait awhile; he must bedropping in before long. i'll have a good look at him then, andperhaps we may become jolly good bedfellows after all_there's notelling.but though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes,and going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer."landlord!" said i, "what sort of a chap is he_does he alwayskeep such late hours?" it was now hard upon twelve o'clock.the landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to bemightily tickled at something beyond my comprehension. "no," heanswered, "generally he's an early bird_airley to bed and airleyto rise_yes, he's the bird what catches the worm. but to-night hewent out a peddling, you see, and i don't see what on airth keeps himso late, unless, may be, he can't sell his head.""can't sell his head?_what sort of a bamboozingly story is thisyou are telling me?" getting into a towering rage. "do you pretendto say, landlord, that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessedsaturday night, or rather sunday morning, in peddling his head aroundthis town?""that's precisely it," said the landlord, "and i told him hecouldn't sell it here, the market's overstocked.""with what?" shouted i."with heads to be sure; ain't there too many heads in the world?""i tell you what it is, landlord," said i quite calmly, "you'dbetter stop spinning that yarn to me_i'm not green.""may be not," taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick, "but irayther guess you'll be done brown if that ere harpooneer hears you aslanderin' his head.""i'll break it for him," said i, now flying into a passion againat this unaccountable farrago of the landlord's."it's broke a'ready," said he."broke," said i_"broke, do you mean?""sartain, and that's the very reason he can't sell it, i guess.""landlord," said i, going up to him as cool as mt. hecla in asnow-storm_"landlord, stop whittling. you and i must understand oneanother, and that too without delay. i come to your house and want abed; you tell me you can only give me half a one; that the other halfbelongs to a certain harpooneer. and about this harpooneer, whom ihave not yet seen, you persist in telling me the most mystifying andexasperating stories tending to beget in me an uncomfortable feelingtowards the man whom you design for my bedfellow_a sort of connexion,landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the highestdegree. i now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what thisharpooneer is, and whether i shall be in all respects safe to spend thenight with him. and in the first place, you will be so good as to unsaythat story about selling his head, which if true i take to be goodevidence that this harpooneer is stark mad, and i've no idea ofsleeping with a madman; and you, sir, you i mean, landlord, you, sir,by trying to induce me to do so knowingly, would thereby render yourselfliable to a criminal prosecution.""wall," said the landlord, fetching a long breath, "that's apurty long sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and then. but beeasy, be easy, this here harpooneer i have been tellin' you of hasjust arrived from the south seas, where he bought up a lot of _balmednew zealand heads (great curios, you know), and he's sold all on_em but one, and that one he's trying to sell to-night, causeto-morrow's sunday, and it would not do to be sellin' human headsabout the streets when folks is goin' to churches. he wanted to, lastsunday, but i stopped him just as he was goin' out of the door withfour heads strung on a string, for all the airth like a string ofinions."this account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, and showedthat the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling me_but atthe same time what could i think of a harpooneer who stayed out of asaturday night clean into the holy sabbath, engaged in such a cannibalbusiness as selling the heads of dead idolators?"depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man.""he pays reg'lar," was the rejoinder. "but come, it's gettingdreadful late, you had better be turning flukes_it's a nice bed; saland me slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced. there's plentyof room for two to kick about in that bed; it's an almighty big bedthat. why, afore we give it up, sal used to put our sam and littlejohnny in the foot of it. but i got a dreaming and sprawling about onenight, and somehow, sam got pitched on the floor, and came near breakinghis arm. arter that, sal said it wouldn't do. come along here, i'llgive ye a glim in a jiffy;" and so saying he lighted a candle and heldit towards me, offering to lead the way. but i stood irresolute;when looking at a clock in the corner, he exclaimed "i vum it'ssunday_you won't see that harpooneer to-night; he's come to anchorsomewhere_come along then; do come; won't ye come?"i considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and i wasushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure enough,with a prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four harpooneersto sleep abreast."there," said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old seachest that did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; "there,make yourself comfortable now, and good night to ye." i turned roundfrom eyeing the bed, but he had disappeared.folding back the counterpane, i stooped over the bed. though none of themost elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well. i then glancedround the room; and besides the bedstead and centre table, could seeno other furniture belonging to the place, but a rude shelf, the fourwalls, and a papered fireboard representing a man striking a whale. ofthings not properly belonging to the room, there was a hammock lashedup, and thrown upon the floor in one corner; also a large seaman'sbag, containing the harpooneer's wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a landtrunk. likewise, there was a parcel of outlandish bone fish hooks on theshelf over the fire-place, and a tall harpoon standing at the head ofthe bed.but what is this on the chest? i took it up, and held it close to thelight, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to arriveat some satisfactory conclusion concerning it. i can compare it tonothing but a large door mat, ornamented at the edges with littletinkling tags something like the stained porcupine quills round anindian moccasin. there was a hole or slit in the middle of this mat,as you see the same in south american ponchos. but could it be possiblethat any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat, and parade thestreets of any christian town in that sort of guise? i put it on, to tryit, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being uncommonly shaggy andthick, and i thought a little damp, as though this mysterious harpooneerhad been wearing it of a rainy day. i went up in it to a bit of glassstuck against the wall, and i never saw such a sight in my life. i toremyself out of it in such a hurry that i gave myself a kink in the neck.i sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about thishead-peddling harpooneer, and his door mat. after thinking some time onthe bed-side, i got up and took off my monkey jacket, and then stood inthe middle of the room thinking. i then took off my coat, and thoughta little more in my shirt sleeves. but beginning to feel very cold now,half undressed as i was, and remembering what the landlord said aboutthe harpooneer's not coming home at all that night, it being so verylate, i made no more ado, but jumped out of my pantaloons and boots, andthen blowing out the light tumbled into bed, and commended myself to thecare of heaven.whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery,there is no telling, but i rolled about a good deal, and could not sleepfor a long time. at last i slid off into a light doze, and had prettynearly made a good offing towards the land of nod, when i heard a heavyfootfall in the passage, and saw a glimmer of light come into the roomfrom under the door.lord save me, thinks i, that must be the harpooneer, the infernalhead-peddler. but i lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a wordtill spoken to. holding a light in one hand, and that identical newzealand head in the other, the stranger entered the room, and withoutlooking towards the bed, placed his candle a good way off from me on thefloor in one corner, and then began working away at the knotted cordsof the large bag i before spoke of as being in the room. i was alleagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted for some time whileemployed in unlacing the bag's mouth. this accomplished, however, heturned round_when, good heavens! what a sight! such a face! it was ofa dark, purplish, yellow colour, here and there stuck over with largeblackish looking squares. yes, it's just as i thought, he's aterrible bedfellow; he's been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and herehe is, just from the surgeon. but at that moment he chanced to turnhis face so towards the light, that i plainly saw they could not besticking-plasters at all, those black squares on his cheeks. they werestains of some sort or other. at first i knew not what to make of this;but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to me. i remembered a storyof a white man_a whaleman too_who, falling among the cannibals, hadbeen tattooed by them. i concluded that this harpooneer, in the courseof his distant voyages, must have met with a similar adventure. andwhat is it, thought i, after all! it's only his outside; a man canbe honest in any sort of skin. but then, what to make of his unearthlycomplexion, that part of it, i mean, lying round about, and completelyindependent of the squares of tattooing. to be sure, it might be nothingbut a good coat of tropical tanning; but i never heard of a hot sun'stanning a white man into a purplish yellow one. however, i had neverbeen in the south seas; and perhaps the sun there produced theseextraordinary effects upon the skin. now, while all these ideas werepassing through me like lightning, this harpooneer never noticed meat all. but, after some difficulty having opened his bag, he commencedfumbling in it, and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and aseal-skin wallet with the hair on. placing these on the old chest in themiddle of the room, he then took the new zealand head_a ghastly thingenough_and crammed it down into the bag. he now took off his hat_anew beaver hat_when i came nigh singing out with fresh surprise. therewas no hair on his head_none to speak of at least_nothing but asmall scalp-knot twisted up on his forehead. his bald purplish head nowlooked for all the world like a mildewed skull. had not the strangerstood between me and the door, i would have bolted out of it quickerthan ever i bolted a dinner.even as it was, i thought something of slipping out of the window, butit was the second floor back. i am no coward, but what to make ofthis head-peddling purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension.ignorance is the parent of fear, and being completely nonplussed andconfounded about the stranger, i confess i was now as much afraid of himas if it was the devil himself who had thus broken into my room atthe dead of night. in fact, i was so afraid of him that i was notgame enough just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory answerconcerning what seemed inexplicable in him.meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showedhis chest and arms. as i live, these covered parts of him were checkeredwith the same squares as his face; his back, too, was all over the samedark squares; he seemed to have been in a thirty years' war, and justescaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt. still more, his verylegs were marked, as if a parcel of dark green frogs were running upthe trunks of young palms. it was now quite plain that he must be someabominable savage or other shipped aboard of a whaleman in the southseas, and so landed in this christian country. i quaked to think of it.a peddler of heads too_perhaps the heads of his own brothers. he mighttake a fancy to mine_heavens! look at that tomahawk!but there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went aboutsomething that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me thathe must indeed be a heathen. going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, ordreadnaught, which he had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in thepockets, and produced at length a curious little deformed image with ahunch on its back, and exactly the colour of a three days' old congobaby. remembering the embalmed head, at first i almost thought thatthis black manikin was a real baby preserved in some similar manner. butseeing that it was not at all limber, and that it glistened a good deallike polished ebony, i concluded that it must be nothing but a woodenidol, which indeed it proved to be. for now the savage goes up to theempty fire-place, and removing the papered fire-board, sets up thislittle hunch-backed image, like a tenpin, between the andirons. thechimney jambs and all the bricks inside were very sooty, so that ithought this fire-place made a very appropriate little shrine or chapelfor his congo idol.i now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image, feeling butill at ease meantime_to see what was next to follow. first he takesabout a double handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, and placesthem carefully before the idol; then laying a bit of ship biscuit ontop and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled the shavings intoa sacrificial blaze. presently, after many hasty snatches into the fire,and still hastier withdrawals of his fingers (whereby he seemed to bescorching them badly), he at last succeeded in drawing out the biscuit;then blowing off the heat and ashes a little, he made a polite offer ofit to the little negro. but the little devil did not seem to fancy suchdry sort of fare at all; he never moved his lips. all these strangeantics were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from thedevotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or else singing somepagan psalmody or other, during which his face twitched about in themost unnatural manner. at last extinguishing the fire, he took the idolup very unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket ascarelessly as if he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.all these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, andseeing him now exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his businessoperations, and jumping into bed with me, i thought it was high time,now or never, before the light was put out, to break the spell in whichi had so long been bound.but the interval i spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one.taking up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it for aninstant, and then holding it to the light, with his mouth at the handle,he puffed out great clouds of tobacco smoke. the next moment the lightwas extinguished, and this wild cannibal, tomahawk between his teeth,sprang into bed with me. i sang out, i could not help it now; and givinga sudden grunt of astonishment he began feeling me.stammering out something, i knew not what, i rolled away from himagainst the wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he mightbe, to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again. but hisguttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended mymeaning."who-e debel you?"_he at last said_"you no speak-e, dam-me, ikill-e." and so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about mein the dark."landlord, for god's sake, peter coffin!" shouted i. "landlord!watch! coffin! angels! save me!""speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, i kill-e!" again growledthe cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scatteredthe hot tobacco ashes about me till i thought my linen would get onfire. but thank heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the roomlight in hand, and leaping from the bed i ran up to him."don't be afraid now," said he, grinning again, "queequeg herewouldn't harm a hair of your head.""stop your grinning," shouted i, "and why didn't you tell methat that infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?""i thought ye know'd it;_didn't i tell ye, he was a peddlin'heads around town?_but turn flukes again and go to sleep. queequeg,look here_you sabbee me, i sabbee_you this man sleepe you_yousabbee?""me sabbee plenty"_grunted queequeg, puffing away at his pipe andsitting up in bed."you gettee in," he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, andthrowing the clothes to one side. he really did this in not only a civilbut a really kind and charitable way. i stood looking at him a moment.for all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean, comely lookingcannibal. what's all this fuss i have been making about, thought ito myself_the man's a human being just as i am: he has just as muchreason to fear me, as i have to be afraid of him. better sleep with asober cannibal than a drunken christian."landlord," said i, "tell him to stash his tomahawk there, orpipe, or whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, andi will turn in with him. but i don't fancy having a man smoking in bedwith me. it's dangerous. besides, i ain't insured."this being told to queequeg, he at once complied, and again politelymotioned me to get into bed_rolling over to one side as much as tosay_"i won't touch a leg of ye.""good night, landlord," said i, "you may go."i turned in, and never slept better in my life.chapter 4. the counterpane.upon waking next morning about daylight, i found queequeg's arm thrownover me in the most loving and affectionate manner. you had almostthought i had been his wife. the counterpane was of patchwork, full ofodd little parti-coloured squares and triangles; and this arm of histattooed all over with an interminable cretan labyrinth of a figure, notwo parts of which were of one precise shade_owing i suppose tohis keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in sun and shade, his shirtsleeves irregularly rolled up at various times_this same arm of his, isay, looked for all the world like a strip of that same patchwork quilt.indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when i first awoke, i couldhardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together; andit was only by the sense of weight and pressure that i could tell thatqueequeg was hugging me.my sensations were strange. let me try to explain them. when i was achild, i well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me;whether it was a reality or a dream, i never could entirely settle. thecircumstance was this. i had been cutting up some caper or other_ithink it was trying to crawl up the chimney, as i had seen a littlesweep do a few days previous; and my stepmother who, somehow or other,was all the time whipping me, or sending me to bed supperless,_mymother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and packed me off tobed, though it was only two o'clock in the afternoon of the 21st june,the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. i felt dreadfully. butthere was no help for it, so up stairs i went to my little room in thethird floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time,and with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.i lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapsebefore i could hope for a resurrection. sixteen hours in bed! thesmall of my back ached to think of it. and it was so light too; thesun shining in at the window, and a great rattling of coaches in thestreets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house. i felt worseand worse_at last i got up, dressed, and softly going down in mystockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and suddenly threw myselfat her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to give me a goodslippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning me to lieabed such an unendurable length of time. but she was the best and mostconscientious of stepmothers, and back i had to go to my room. forseveral hours i lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than ihave ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes. atlast i must have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and slowlywaking from it_half steeped in dreams_i opened my eyes, and thebefore sun-lit room was now wrapped in outer darkness. instantly ifelt a shock running through all my frame; nothing was to be seen, andnothing was to be heard; but a supernatural hand seemed placed in mine.my arm hung over the counterpane, and the nameless, unimaginable, silentform or phantom, to which the hand belonged, seemed closely seated by mybed-side. for what seemed ages piled on ages, i lay there, frozen withthe most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand; yet ever thinkingthat if i could but stir it one single inch, the horrid spell would bebroken. i knew not how this consciousness at last glided away from me;but waking in the morning, i shudderingly remembered it all, and fordays and weeks and months afterwards i lost myself in confoundingattempts to explain the mystery. nay, to this very hour, i often puzzlemyself with it.now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling thesupernatural hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, tothose which i experienced on waking up and seeing queequeg's paganarm thrown round me. but at length all the past night's events soberlyrecurred, one by one, in fixed reality, and then i lay only alive tothe comical predicament. for though i tried to move his arm_unlock hisbridegroom clasp_yet, sleeping as he was, he still hugged me tightly,as though naught but death should part us twain. i now strove to rousehim_"queequeg!"_but his only answer was a snore. i then rolledover, my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly felta slight scratch. throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawksleeping by the savage's side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby.a pretty pickle, truly, thought i; abed here in a strange house in thebroad day, with a cannibal and a tomahawk! "queequeg!_in the name ofgoodness, queequeg, wake!" at length, by dint of much wriggling, andloud and incessant expostulations upon the unbecomingness of hishugging a fellow male in that matrimonial sort of style, i succeeded inextracting a grunt; and presently, he drew back his arm, shook himselfall over like a newfoundland dog just from the water, and sat up in bed,stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes as if hedid not altogether remember how i came to be there, though a dimconsciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning overhim. meanwhile, i lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivingsnow, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. when, atlast, his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow,and he became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out uponthe floor, and by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that,if it pleased me, he would dress first and then leave me to dressafterwards, leaving the whole apartment to myself. thinks i, queequeg,under the circumstances, this is a very civilized overture; but, thetruth is, these savages have an innate sense of delicacy, say whatyou will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they are. i pay thisparticular compliment to queequeg, because he treated me with so muchcivility and consideration, while i was guilty of great rudeness;staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; forthe time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. nevertheless,a man like queequeg you don't see every day, he and his ways were wellworth unusual regarding.he commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall one,by the by, and then_still minus his trowsers_he hunted up hisboots. what under the heavens he did it for, i cannot tell, but his nextmovement was to crush himself_boots in hand, and hat on_under thebed; when, from sundry violent gaspings and strainings, i inferred hewas hard at work booting himself; though by no law of propriety thati ever heard of, is any man required to be private when putting onhis boots. but queequeg, do you see, was a creature in the transitionstage_neither caterpillar nor butterfly. he was just enough civilizedto show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners. hiseducation was not yet completed. he was an undergraduate. if he had notbeen a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubledhimself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage,he never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. atlast, he emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over hiseyes, and began creaking and limping about the room, as if, notbeing much accustomed to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhideones_probably not made to order either_rather pinched and tormentedhim at the first go off of a bitter cold morning.seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that thestreet being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain viewinto the room, and observing more and more the indecorous figure thatqueequeg made, staving about with little else but his hat and boots on;i begged him as well as i could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat,and particularly to get into his pantaloons as soon as possible. hecomplied, and then proceeded to wash himself. at that time in themorning any christian would have washed his face; but queequeg, tomy amazement, contented himself with restricting his ablutions to hischest, arms, and hands. he then donned his waistcoat, and taking up apiece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into waterand commenced lathering his face. i was watching to see where he kepthis razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed corner,slips out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a littleon his boot, and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall,begins a vigorous scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks. thinksi, queequeg, this is using rogers's best cutlery with a vengeance.afterwards i wondered the less at this operation when i came to know ofwhat fine steel the head of a harpoon is made, and how exceedingly sharpthe long straight edges are always kept.the rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out ofthe room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting hisharpoon like a marshal's baton.chapter 5. breakfast.i quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted thegrinning landlord very pleasantly. i cherished no malice towards him,though he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of mybedfellow.however, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce agood thing; the more's the pity. so, if any one man, in his ownproper person, afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not bebackward, but let him cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent inthat way. and the man that has anything bountifully laughable about him,be sure there is more in that man than you perhaps think for.the bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in thenight previous, and whom i had not as yet had a good look at. they werenearly all whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, andsea carpenters, and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and harpooneers,and ship keepers; a brown and brawny company, with bosky beards; anunshorn, shaggy set, all wearing monkey jackets for morning gowns.you could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. thisyoung fellow's healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, andwould seem to smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three dayslanded from his indian voyage. that man next him looks a few shadeslighter; you might say a touch of satin wood is in him. in thecomplexion of a third still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightly bleachedwithal; he doubtless has tarried whole weeks ashore. but who could showa cheek like queequeg? which, barred with various tints, seemed likethe andes' western slope, to show forth in one array, contrastingclimates, zone by zone."grub, ho!" now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in wewent to breakfast.they say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at easein manner, quite self-possessed in company. not always, though: ledyard,the great new england traveller, and mungo park, the scotch one; of allmen, they possessed the least assurance in the parlor. but perhaps themere crossing of siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as ledyard did, orthe taking a long solitary walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heartof africa, which was the sum of poor mungo's performances_this kindof travel, i say, may not be the very best mode of attaining a highsocial polish. still, for the most part, that sort of thing is to be hadanywhere.these reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance thatafter we were all seated at the table, and i was preparing to hear somegood stories about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly everyman maintained a profound silence. and not only that, but they lookedembarrassed. yes, here were a set of sea-dogs, many of whom without theslightest bashfulness had boarded great whales on the high seas_entirestrangers to them_and duelled them dead without winking; and yet, herethey sat at a social breakfast table_all of the same calling, all ofkindred tastes_looking round as sheepishly at each other as thoughthey had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the greenmountains. a curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warriorwhalemen!but as for queequeg_why, queequeg sat there among them_at the headof the table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. to be sure icannot say much for his breeding. his greatest admirer could not havecordially justified his bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him,and using it there without ceremony; reaching over the table with it,to the imminent jeopardy of many heads, and grappling the beefsteakstowards him. but that was certainly very coolly done by him, and everyone knows that in most people's estimation, to do anything coolly isto do it genteelly.we will not speak of all queequeg's peculiarities here; how heeschewed coffee and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention tobeefsteaks, done rare. enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrewlike the rest into the public room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and wassitting there quietly digesting and smoking with his inseparable hat on,when i sallied out for a stroll.chapter 6. the street.if i had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandishan individual as queequeg circulating among the polite society of acivilized town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my firstdaylight stroll through the streets of new bedford.in thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport willfrequently offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreignparts. even in broadway and chestnut streets, mediterranean marinerswill sometimes jostle the affrighted ladies. regent street is notunknown to lascars and malays; and at bombay, in the apollo green, liveyankees have often scared the natives. but new bedford beats all waterstreet and wapping. in these last-mentioned haunts you see only sailors;but in new bedford, actual cannibals stand chatting at street corners;savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their bones unholy flesh. itmakes a stranger stare.but, besides the feegeeans, tongatobooarrs, erromanggoans, pannangians,and brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craftwhich unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights stillmore curious, certainly more comical. there weekly arrive in this townscores of green vermonters and new hampshire men, all athirst for gainand glory in the fishery. they are mostly young, of stalwart frames;fellows who have felled forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatchthe whale-lance. many are as green as the green mountains whence theycame. in some things you would think them but a few hours old. lookthere! that chap strutting round the corner. he wears a beaver hat andswallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and sheath-knife. herecomes another with a sou'-wester and a bombazine cloak.no town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one_i mean adownright bumpkin dandy_a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow histwo acres in buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. now when acountry dandy like this takes it into his head to make a distinguishedreputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, you should see thecomical things he does upon reaching the seaport. in bespeaking hissea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his waistcoats; straps to hiscanvas trowsers. ah, poor hay-seed! how bitterly will burst those strapsin the first howling gale, when thou art driven, straps, buttons, andall, down the throat of the tempest.but think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals, andbumpkins to show her visitors. not at all. still new bedford is a queerplace. had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would thisday perhaps have been in as howling condition as the coast of labrador.as it is, parts of her back country are enough to frighten one, theylook so bony. the town itself is perhaps the dearest place to livein, in all new england. it is a land of oil, true enough: but not likecanaan; a land, also, of corn and wine. the streets do not run withmilk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them with fresh eggs. yet, inspite of this, nowhere in all america will you find more patrician-likehouses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in new bedford. whence camethey? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of a country?go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder loftymansion, and your question will be answered. yes; all these brave housesand flowery gardens came from the atlantic, pacific, and indian oceans.one and all, they were harpooned and dragged up hither from the bottomof the sea. can herr alexander perform a feat like that?in new bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to theirdaughters, and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece.you must go to new bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say,they have reservoirs of oil in every house, and every night recklesslyburn their lengths in spermaceti candles.in summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples_longavenues of green and gold. and in august, high in air, the beautiful andbountiful horse-chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by theirtapering upright cones of congregated blossoms. so omnipotent is art;which in many a district of new bedford has superinduced bright terracesof flowers upon the barren refuse rocks thrown aside at creation'sfinal day.and the women of new bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. butroses only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeksis perennial as sunlight in the seventh heavens. elsewhere match thatbloom of theirs, ye cannot, save in salem, where they tell me the younggirls breathe such musk, their sailor sweethearts smell them miles offshore, as though they were drawing nigh the odorous moluccas instead ofthe puritanic sands.chapter 7. the chapel.in this same new bedford there stands a whaleman's chapel, and few arethe moody fishermen, shortly bound for the indian ocean or pacific, whofail to make a sunday visit to the spot. i am sure that i did not.returning from my first morning stroll, i again sallied out upon thisspecial errand. the sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to drivingsleet and mist. wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth calledbearskin, i fought my way against the stubborn storm. entering, i founda small scattered congregation of sailors, and sailors' wives andwidows. a muffled silence reigned, only broken at times by the shrieksof the storm. each silent worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart fromthe other, as if each silent grief were insular and incommunicable. thechaplain had not yet arrived; and there these silent islands of men andwomen sat steadfastly eyeing several marble tablets, with black borders,masoned into the wall on either side the pulpit. three of them ransomething like the following, but i do not pretend to quote:_sacred to the memory of john talbot, who, at the age of eighteen, waslost overboard, near the isle of desolation, off patagonia, november1st, 1836. this tablet is erected to his memory by his sister.sacred to the memory of robert long, willis ellery, nathan coleman,walter canny, seth macy, and samuel gleig, forming one of the boats'crews of the ship eliza who were towed out of sight by a whale, on theoff-shore ground in the pacific, december 31st, 1839. this marble ishere placed by their surviving shipmates.sacred to the memory of the late captain ezekiel hardy, who in the bowsof his boat was killed by a sperm whale on the coast of japan, august3d, 1833. this tablet is erected to his memory by his widow.shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, i seated myselfnear the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see queequeg nearme. affected by the solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gazeof incredulous curiosity in his countenance. this savage was the onlyperson present who seemed to notice my entrance; because he was the onlyone who could not read, and, therefore, was not reading those frigidinscriptions on the wall. whether any of the relatives of the seamenwhose names appeared there were now among the congregation, i knew not;but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the fishery, and so plainlydid several women present wear the countenance if not the trappingsof some unceasing grief, that i feel sure that here before me wereassembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of those bleaktablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing amongflowers can say_here, here lies my beloved; ye know not thedesolation that broods in bosoms like these. what bitter blanks inthose black-bordered marbles which cover no ashes! what despair in thoseimmovable inscriptions! what deadly voids and unbidden infidelities inthe lines that seem to gnaw upon all faith, and refuse resurrections tothe beings who have placelessly perished without a grave. as well mightthose tablets stand in the cave of elephanta as here.in what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included;why it is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell notales, though containing more secrets than the goodwin sands; how it isthat to his name who yesterday departed for the other world, we prefixso significant and infidel a word, and yet do not thus entitle him, ifhe but embarks for the remotest indies of this living earth; why thelife insurance companies pay death-forfeitures upon immortals; in whateternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly, hopeless trance, yet liesantique adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how it is that westill refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless maintain aredwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to hush allthe dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will terrify awhole city. all these things are not without their meanings.but faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from thesedead doubts she gathers her most vital hope.it needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of anantucket voyage, i regarded those marble tablets, and by the murkylight of that darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemenwho had gone before me. yes, ishmael, the same fate may be thine. butsomehow i grew merry again. delightful inducements to embark, finechance for promotion, it seems_aye, a stove boat will make me animmortal by brevet. yes, there is death in this business of whaling_aspeechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into eternity. but whatthen? methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of life and death.methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my truesubstance. methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are toomuch like oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking thatthick water the thinnest of air. methinks my body is but the lees of mybetter being. in fact take my body who will, take it i say, it is notme. and therefore three cheers for nantucket; and come a stove boat andstove body when they will, for stave my soul, jove himself cannot.chapter 8. the pulpit.i had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerablerobustness entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back uponadmitting him, a quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation,sufficiently attested that this fine old man was the chaplain. yes, itwas the famous father mapple, so called by the whalemen, among whom hewas a very great favourite. he had been a sailor and a harpooneer in hisyouth, but for many years past had dedicated his life to the ministry.at the time i now write of, father mapple was in the hardy winter of ahealthy old age; that sort of old age which seems merging into a secondflowering youth, for among all the fissures of his wrinkles, there shonecertain mild gleams of a newly developing bloom_the spring verdurepeeping forth even beneath february's snow. no one having previouslyheard his history, could for the first time behold father mapple withoutthe utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clericalpeculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime lifehe had led. when he entered i observed that he carried no umbrella, andcertainly had not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran downwith melting sleet, and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost todrag him to the floor with the weight of the water it had absorbed.however, hat and coat and overshoes were one by one removed, and hung upin a little space in an adjacent corner; when, arrayed in a decent suit,he quietly approached the pulpit.like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since aregular stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the floor,seriously contract the already small area of the chapel, the architect,it seemed, had acted upon the hint of father mapple, and finished thepulpit without a stairs, substituting a perpendicular side ladder, likethose used in mounting a ship from a boat at sea. the wife of a whalingcaptain had provided the chapel with a handsome pair of red worstedman-ropes for this ladder, which, being itself nicely headed, andstained with a mahogany colour, the whole contrivance, considering whatmanner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in bad taste. halting foran instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both hands grasping theornamental knobs of the man-ropes, father mapple cast a look upwards,and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential dexterity, handover hand, mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of his vessel.the perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case withswinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of wood,so that at every step there was a joint. at my first glimpse of thepulpit, it had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship,these joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary. for i was notprepared to see father mapple after gaining the height, slowly turnround, and stooping over the pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladderstep by step, till the whole was deposited within, leaving himimpregnable in his little quebec.i pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this.father mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and sanctity,that i could not suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricksof the stage. no, thought i, there must be some sober reason for thisthing; furthermore, it must symbolize something unseen. can it be,then, that by that act of physical isolation, he signifies his spiritualwithdrawal for the time, from all outward worldly ties and connexions?yes, for replenished with the meat and wine of the word, to the faithfulman of god, this pulpit, i see, is a self-containing stronghold_alofty ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial well of water within the walls.but the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place,borrowed from the chaplain's former sea-farings. between the marblecenotaphs on either hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its backwas adorned with a large painting representing a gallant ship beatingagainst a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and snowybreakers. but high above the flying scud and dark-rolling clouds, therefloated a little isle of sunlight, from which beamed forth an angel'sface; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of radiance upon theship's tossed deck, something like that silver plate now inserted intothe victory's plank where nelson fell. "ah, noble ship," the angelseemed to say, "beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardyhelm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rollingoff_serenest azure is at hand."nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste thathad achieved the ladder and the picture. its panelled front was inthe likeness of a ship's bluff bows, and the holy bible rested ona projecting piece of scroll work, fashioned after a ship'sfiddle-headed beak.what could be more full of meaning?_for the pulpit is ever thisearth's foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpitleads the world. from thence it is the storm of god's quick wrath isfirst descried, and the bow must bear the earliest brunt. from thenceit is the god of breezes fair or foul is first invoked for favourablewinds. yes, the world's a ship on its passage out, and not a voyagecomplete; and the pulpit is its prow.chapter 9. the sermon.father mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority orderedthe scattered people to condense. "starboard gangway, there! side awayto larboard_larboard gangway to starboard! midships! midships!"there was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and astill slighter shuffling of women's shoes, and all was quiet again,and every eye on the preacher.he paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit's bows, folded hislarge brown hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, andoffered a prayer so deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying atthe bottom of the sea.this ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling ofa bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog_in such tones hecommenced reading the following hymn; but changing his manner towardsthe concluding stanzas, burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy_ "the ribs and terrors in the whale, arched over me a dismal gloom, while all god's sun-lit waves rolled by, and lift me deepening down to doom. "i saw the opening maw of hell, with endless pains and sorrows there; which none but they that feel can tell_ oh, i was plunging to despair. "in black distress, i called my god, when i could scarce believe him mine, he bowed his ear to my complaints_ no more the whale did me confine. "with speed he flew to my relief, as on a radiant dolphin borne; awful, yet bright, as lightning shone the face of my deliverer god. "my song for ever shall record that terrible, that joyful hour; i give the glory to my god, his all the mercy and the power."nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above thehowling of the storm. a brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turnedover the leaves of the bible, and at last, folding his hand down uponthe proper page, said: "beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse ofthe first chapter of jonah__and god had prepared a great fish toswallow up jonah.'""shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters_four yarns_isone of the smallest strands in the mighty cable of the scriptures.yet what depths of the soul does jonah's deep sealine sound! whata pregnant lesson to us is this prophet! what a noble thing is thatcanticle in the fish's belly! how billow-like and boisterously grand!we feel the floods surging over us; we sound with him to the kelpybottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea is about us!but what is this lesson that the book of jonah teaches? shipmates, it isa two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and a lessonto me as a pilot of the living god. as sinful men, it is a lesson tous all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenlyawakened fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finallythe deliverance and joy of jonah. as with all sinners among men, the sinof this son of amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the command ofgod_never mind now what that command was, or how conveyed_which hefound a hard command. but all the things that god would have us do arehard for us to do_remember that_and hence, he oftener commandsus than endeavors to persuade. and if we obey god, we must disobeyourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the hardnessof obeying god consists."with this sin of disobedience in him, jonah still further flouts atgod, by seeking to flee from him. he thinks that a ship made by men willcarry him into countries where god does not reign, but only the captainsof this earth. he skulks about the wharves of joppa, and seeks a shipthat's bound for tarshish. there lurks, perhaps, a hitherto unheededmeaning here. by all accounts tarshish could have been no other citythan the modern cadiz. that's the opinion of learned men. and whereis cadiz, shipmates? cadiz is in spain; as far by water, from joppa,as jonah could possibly have sailed in those ancient days, when theatlantic was an almost unknown sea. because joppa, the modern jaffa,shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the mediterranean, thesyrian; and tarshish or cadiz more than two thousand miles to thewestward from that, just outside the straits of gibraltar. see yenot then, shipmates, that jonah sought to flee world-wide from god?miserable man! oh! most contemptible and worthy of all scorn; withslouched hat and guilty eye, skulking from his god; prowling among theshipping like a vile burglar hastening to cross the seas. so disordered,self-condemning is his look, that had there been policemen in thosedays, jonah, on the mere suspicion of something wrong, had been arrestedere he touched a deck. how plainly he's a fugitive! no baggage, not ahat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,_no friends accompany him to the wharfwith their adieux. at last, after much dodging search, he finds thetarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and as he steps onboard to see its captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the momentdesist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger's evil eye.jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and confidence;in vain essays his wretched smile. strong intuitions of the man assurethe mariners he can be no innocent. in their gamesome but still seriousway, one whispers to the other_"jack, he's robbed a widow;" or,"joe, do you mark him; he's a bigamist;" or, "harry lad, i guesshe's the adulterer that broke jail in old gomorrah, or belike, oneof the missing murderers from sodom." another runs to read the billthat's stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship ismoored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of aparricide, and containing a description of his person. he reads, andlooks from jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates nowcrowd round jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. frighted jonahtrembles, and summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks somuch the more a coward. he will not confess himself suspected; but thatitself is strong suspicion. so he makes the best of it; and when thesailors find him not to be the man that is advertised, they let himpass, and he descends into the cabin."_who's there?' cries the captain at his busy desk, hurriedlymaking out his papers for the customs__who's there?' oh! howthat harmless question mangles jonah! for the instant he almost turnsto flee again. but he rallies. _i seek a passage in this ship totarshish; how soon sail ye, sir?' thus far the busy captain had notlooked up to jonah, though the man now stands before him; but no soonerdoes he hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance._we sail with the next coming tide,' at last he slowly answered,still intently eyeing him. _no sooner, sir?'__soon enough forany honest man that goes a passenger.' ha! jonah, that's anotherstab. but he swiftly calls away the captain from that scent. _i'llsail with ye,'_he says,__the passage money how much isthat?_i'll pay now.' for it is particularly written, shipmates, asif it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, _that he paidthe fare thereof' ere the craft did sail. and taken with the context,this is full of meaning."now jonah's captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detectscrime in any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. inthis world, shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, andwithout a passport; whereas virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at allfrontiers. so jonah's captain prepares to test the length of jonah'spurse, ere he judge him openly. he charges him thrice the usual sum; andit's assented to. then the captain knows that jonah is a fugitive;but at the same time resolves to help a flight that paves its rear withgold. yet when jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent suspicionsstill molest the captain. he rings every coin to find a counterfeit. nota forger, any way, he mutters; and jonah is put down for hispassage. _point out my state-room, sir,' says jonah now, _i'mtravel-weary; i need sleep.' _thou lookest like it,' says thecaptain, _there's thy room.' jonah enters, and would lock thedoor, but the lock contains no key. hearing him foolishly fumblingthere, the captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters something aboutthe doors of convicts' cells being never allowed to be locked within.all dressed and dusty as he is, jonah throws himself into his berth, andfinds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. theair is close, and jonah gasps. then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,beneath the ship's water-line, jonah feels the heralding presentimentof that stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest ofhis bowels' wards."screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightlyoscillates in jonah's room; and the ship, heeling over towards thewharf with the weight of the last bales received, the lamp, flame andall, though in slight motion, still maintains a permanent obliquity withreference to the room; though, in truth, infallibly straight itself, itbut made obvious the false, lying levels among which it hung. the lampalarms and frightens jonah; as lying in his berth his tormented eyesroll round the place, and this thus far successful fugitive finds norefuge for his restless glance. but that contradiction in the lamp moreand more appals him. the floor, the ceiling, and the side, are all awry._oh! so my conscience hangs in me!' he groans, _straight upwards,so it burns; but the chambers of my soul are all in crookedness!'"like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, stillreeling, but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of theroman race-horse but so much the more strike his steel tags into him; asone who in that miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy anguish,praying god for annihilation until the fit be passed; and at last amidthe whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as over theman who bleeds to death, for conscience is the wound, and there'snaught to staunch it; so, after sore wrestlings in his berth, jonah'sprodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning down to sleep."and now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; andfrom the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for tarshish, all careening,glides to sea. that ship, my friends, was the first of recordedsmugglers! the contraband was jonah. but the sea rebels; he will notbear the wicked burden. a dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like tobreak. but now when the boatswain calls all hands to lighten her;when boxes, bales, and jars are clattering overboard; when the windis shrieking, and the men are yelling, and every plank thunders withtrampling feet right over jonah's head; in all this raging tumult,jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. he sees no black sky and raging sea,feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the farrush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving theseas after him. aye, shipmates, jonah was gone down into the sides ofthe ship_a berth in the cabin as i have taken it, and was fast asleep.but the frightened master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead ear,_what meanest thou, o, sleeper! arise!' startled from his lethargyby that direful cry, jonah staggers to his feet, and stumbling to thedeck, grasps a shroud, to look out upon the sea. but at that moment heis sprung upon by a panther billow leaping over the bulwarks. wave afterwave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no speedy vent runs roaringfore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning while yet afloat.and ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from the steepgullies in the blackness overhead, aghast jonah sees the rearingbowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards thetormented deep."terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. in all hiscringing attitudes, the god-fugitive is now too plainly known. thesailors mark him; more and more certain grow their suspicions of him,and at last, fully to test the truth, by referring the whole matterto high heaven, they fall to casting lots, to see for whose cause thisgreat tempest was upon them. the lot is jonah's; that discovered,then how furiously they mob him with their questions. _what is thineoccupation? whence comest thou? thy country? what people? but mark now,my shipmates, the behavior of poor jonah. the eager mariners but ask himwho he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive an answer tothose questions, but likewise another answer to a question not put bythem, but the unsolicited answer is forced from jonah by the hard handof god that is upon him."_i am a hebrew,' he cries_and then__i fear the lord the godof heaven who hath made the sea and the dry land!' fear him, o jonah?aye, well mightest thou fear the lord god then! straightway, he now goeson to make a full confession; whereupon the mariners became moreand more appalled, but still are pitiful. for when jonah, not yetsupplicating god for mercy, since he but too well knew the darkness ofhis deserts,_when wretched jonah cries out to them to take him andcast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for his sake this greattempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek byother means to save the ship. but all in vain; the indignant gale howlslouder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to god, with the otherthey not unreluctantly lay hold of jonah."and now behold jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea;when instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the seais still, as jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smoothwater behind. he goes down in the whirling heart of such a masterlesscommotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he drops seething intothe yawning jaws awaiting him; and the whale shoots-to all his ivoryteeth, like so many white bolts, upon his prison. then jonah prayed untothe lord out of the fish's belly. but observe his prayer, and learna weighty lesson. for sinful as he is, jonah does not weep and wail fordirect deliverance. he feels that his dreadful punishment is just. heleaves all his deliverance to god, contenting himself with this, thatspite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards his holytemple. and here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance; notclamorous for pardon, but grateful for punishment. and how pleasing togod was this conduct in jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance ofhim from the sea and the whale. shipmates, i do not place jonah beforeyou to be copied for his sin but i do place him before you as a modelfor repentance. sin not; but if you do, take heed to repent of it likejonah."while he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking,slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who,when describing jonah's sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself.his deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed thewarring elements at work; and the thunders that rolled away from off hisswarthy brow, and the light leaping from his eye, made all his simplehearers look on him with a quick fear that was strange to them.there now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the leavesof the book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with closedeyes, for the moment, seemed communing with god and himself.but again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly,with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake thesewords:"shipmates, god has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands pressupon me. i have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson thatjonah teaches to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to me,for i am a greater sinner than ye. and now how gladly would i come downfrom this mast-head and sit on the hatches there where you sit, andlisten as you listen, while some one of you reads me that other and moreawful lesson which jonah teaches to me, as a pilot of the living god.how being an anointed pilot-prophet, or speaker of true things, andbidden by the lord to sound those unwelcome truths in the ears of awicked nineveh, jonah, appalled at the hostility he should raise, fledfrom his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his god by takingship at joppa. but god is everywhere; tarshish he never reached. as wehave seen, god came upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down toliving gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along _intothe midst of the seas,' where the eddying depths sucked him tenthousand fathoms down, and _the weeds were wrapped about his head,'and all the watery world of woe bowled over him. yet even then beyondthe reach of any plummet__out of the belly of hell'_when thewhale grounded upon the ocean's utmost bones, even then, god heardthe engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. then god spake unto thefish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, thewhale came breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and allthe delights of air and earth; and _vomited out jonah upon the dryland;' when the word of the lord came a second time; andjonah, bruised and beaten_his ears, like two sea-shells, stillmultitudinously murmuring of the ocean_jonah did the almighty'sbidding. and what was that, shipmates? to preach the truth to the faceof falsehood! that was it!"this, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot ofthe living god who slights it. woe to him whom this world charms fromgospel duty! woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when godhas brewed them into a gale! woe to him who seeks to please rather thanto appal! woe to him whose good name is more to him than goodness! woeto him who, in this world, courts not dishonour! woe to him who wouldnot be true, even though to be false were salvation! yea, woe to himwho, as the great pilot paul has it, while preaching to others ishimself a castaway!"he dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting hisface to them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out witha heavenly enthusiasm,_"but oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand ofevery woe, there is a sure delight; and higher the top of that delight,than the bottom of the woe is deep. is not the main-truck higher thanthe kelson is low? delight is to him_a far, far upward, and inwarddelight_who against the proud gods and commodores of this earth, everstands forth his own inexorable self. delight is to him whose strongarms yet support him, when the ship of this base treacherous world hasgone down beneath him. delight is to him, who gives no quarter in thetruth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck it outfrom under the robes of senators and judges. delight,_top-gallantdelight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the lord hisgod, and is only a patriot to heaven. delight is to him, whom all thewaves of the billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shakefrom this sure keel of the ages. and eternal delight and deliciousnesswill be his, who coming to lay him down, can say with his finalbreath_o father!_chiefly known to me by thy rod_mortal orimmortal, here i die. i have striven to be thine, more than to be thisworld's, or mine own. yet this is nothing: i leave eternity to thee;for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his god?"he said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face withhis hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed,and he was left alone in the place.chapter 10. a bosom friend.returning to the spouter-inn from the chapel, i found queequeg therequite alone; he having left the chapel before the benediction some time.he was sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the stovehearth, and in one hand was holding close up to his face that littlenegro idol of his; peering hard into its face, and with a jack-knifegently whittling away at its nose, meanwhile humming to himself in hisheathenish way.but being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, goingto the table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lapbegan counting the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftiethpage_as i fancied_stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him,and giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment.he would then begin again at the next fifty; seeming to commence atnumber one each time, as though he could not count more than fifty, andit was only by such a large number of fifties being found together, thathis astonishment at the multitude of pages was excited.with much interest i sat watching him. savage though he was, andhideously marred about the face_at least to my taste_his countenanceyet had a something in it which was by no means disagreeable. you cannothide the soul. through all his unearthly tattooings, i thought i sawthe traces of a simple honest heart; and in his large, deep eyes,fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens of a spirit that would dare athousand devils. and besides all this, there was a certain lofty bearingabout the pagan, which even his uncouthness could not altogether maim.he looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had a creditor.whether it was, too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was drawnout in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive than itotherwise would, this i will not venture to decide; but certain it washis head was phrenologically an excellent one. it may seem ridiculous,but it reminded me of general washington's head, as seen in thepopular busts of him. it had the same long regularly graded retreatingslope from above the brows, which were likewise very projecting,like two long promontories thickly wooded on top. queequeg was georgewashington cannibalistically developed.whilst i was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to belooking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my presence,never troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but appearedwholly occupied with counting the pages of the marvellous book.considering how sociably we had been sleeping together the nightprevious, and especially considering the affectionate arm i had foundthrown over me upon waking in the morning, i thought this indifferenceof his very strange. but savages are strange beings; at times you do notknow exactly how to take them. at first they are overawing; their calmself-collectedness of simplicity seems a socratic wisdom. i had noticedalso that queequeg never consorted at all, or but very little, with theother seamen in the inn. he made no advances whatever; appeared to haveno desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances. all this struckme as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there was somethingalmost sublime in it. here was a man some twenty thousand miles fromhome, by the way of cape horn, that is_which was the only way he couldget there_thrown among people as strange to him as though he were inthe planet jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preservingthe utmost serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal tohimself. surely this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt hehad never heard there was such a thing as that. but, perhaps, to betrue philosophers, we mortals should not be conscious of so living orso striving. so soon as i hear that such or such a man gives himselfout for a philosopher, i conclude that, like the dyspeptic old woman, hemust have "broken his digester."as i sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in thatmild stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it thenonly glows to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gatheringround the casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain;the storm booming without in solemn swells; i began to be sensible ofstrange feelings. i felt a melting in me. no more my splintered heartand maddened hand were turned against the wolfish world. this soothingsavage had redeemed it. there he sat, his very indifference speaking anature in which there lurked no civilized hypocrisies and bland deceits.wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet i began to feel myselfmysteriously drawn towards him. and those same things that would haverepelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus drew me.i'll try a pagan friend, thought i, since christian kindness hasproved but hollow courtesy. i drew my bench near him, and made somefriendly signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. atfirst he little noticed these advances; but presently, upon my referringto his last night's hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether wewere again to be bedfellows. i told him yes; whereat i thought he lookedpleased, perhaps a little complimented.we then turned over the book together, and i endeavored to explain tohim the purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few picturesthat were in it. thus i soon engaged his interest; and from that we wentto jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights to be seenin this famous town. soon i proposed a social smoke; and, producinghis pouch and tomahawk, he quietly offered me a puff. and then we satexchanging puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keeping it regularlypassing between us.if there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the pagan'sbreast, this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and leftus cronies. he seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly asi to him; and when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead againstmine, clasped me round the waist, and said that henceforth we weremarried; meaning, in his country's phrase, that we were bosom friends;he would gladly die for me, if need should be. in a countryman, thissudden flame of friendship would have seemed far too premature, a thingto be much distrusted; but in this simple savage those old rules wouldnot apply.after supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our roomtogether. he made me a present of his embalmed head; took out hisenormous tobacco wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew outsome thirty dollars in silver; then spreading them on the table, andmechanically dividing them into two equal portions, pushed one of themtowards me, and said it was mine. i was going to remonstrate; but hesilenced me by pouring them into my trowsers' pockets. i let themstay. he then went about his evening prayers, took out his idol, andremoved the paper fireboard. by certain signs and symptoms, i thought heseemed anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to follow,i deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, i would comply orotherwise.i was a good christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infalliblepresbyterian church. how then could i unite with this wild idolator inworshipping his piece of wood? but what is worship? thought i. doyou suppose now, ishmael, that the magnanimous god of heaven andearth_pagans and all included_can possibly be jealous of aninsignificant bit of black wood? impossible! but what is worship?_todo the will of god_that is worship. and what is the will of god?_todo to my fellow man what i would have my fellow man to do to me_thatis the will of god. now, queequeg is my fellow man. and what do i wishthat this queequeg would do to me? why, unite with me in my particularpresbyterian form of worship. consequently, i must then unite with himin his; ergo, i must turn idolator. so i kindled the shavings; helpedprop up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit withqueequeg; salamed before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and thatdone, we undressed and went to bed, at peace with our own consciencesand all the world. but we did not go to sleep without some little chat.how it is i know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidentialdisclosures between friends. man and wife, they say, there open the verybottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often lie andchat over old times till nearly morning. thus, then, in our hearts'honeymoon, lay i and queequeg_a cosy, loving pair.chapter 11. nightgown.we had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, andqueequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legsover mine, and then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and freeand easy were we; when, at last, by reason of our confabulations, whatlittle nappishness remained in us altogether departed, and we felt likegetting up again, though day-break was yet some way down the future.yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent positionbegan to grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselvessitting up; the clothes well tucked around us, leaning against thehead-board with our four knees drawn up close together, and our twonoses bending over them, as if our kneepans were warming-pans. we feltvery nice and snug, the more so since it was so chilly out of doors;indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there was no fire in theroom. the more so, i say, because truly to enjoy bodily warmth, somesmall part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this worldthat is not what it is merely by contrast. nothing exists in itself. ifyou flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been soa long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. but if,like queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crownof your head be slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the generalconsciousness you feel most delightfully and unmistakably warm. for thisreason a sleeping apartment should never be furnished with a fire, whichis one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich. for the height of thissort of deliciousness is to have nothing but the blanket between you andyour snugness and the cold of the outer air. then there you lie like theone warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal.we had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all atonce i thought i would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whetherby day or by night, and whether asleep or awake, i have a way of alwayskeeping my eyes shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugnessof being in bed. because no man can ever feel his own identity arightexcept his eyes be closed; as if darkness were indeed the proper elementof our essences, though light be more congenial to our clayey part. uponopening my eyes then, and coming out of my own pleasant and self-createddarkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom of the unilluminatedtwelve-o'clock-at-night, i experienced a disagreeable revulsion. nordid i at all object to the hint from queequeg that perhaps it were bestto strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides hefelt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his tomahawk. be itsaid, that though i had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking inthe bed the night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices growwhen love once comes to bend them. for now i liked nothing better thanto have queequeg smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to befull of such serene household joy then. i no more felt unduly concernedfor the landlord's policy of insurance. i was only alive to thecondensed confidential comfortableness of sharing a pipe and a blanketwith a real friend. with our shaggy jackets drawn about our shoulders,we now passed the tomahawk from one to the other, till slowly there grewover us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by the flame of thenew-lit lamp.whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to fardistant scenes, i know not, but he now spoke of his native island; and,eager to hear his history, i begged him to go on and tell it. he gladlycomplied. though at the time i but ill comprehended not a few of hiswords, yet subsequent disclosures, when i had become more familiar withhis broken phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story such asit may prove in the mere skeleton i give.chapter 12. biographical.queequeg was a native of rokovoko, an island far away to the west andsouth. it is not down in any map; true places never are.when a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands ina grass clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a greensapling; even then, in queequeg's ambitious soul, lurked a strongdesire to see something more of christendom than a specimen whaler ortwo. his father was a high chief, a king; his uncle a high priest;and on the maternal side he boasted aunts who were the wives ofunconquerable warriors. there was excellent blood in his veins_royalstuff; though sadly vitiated, i fear, by the cannibal propensity henourished in his untutored youth.a sag harbor ship visited his father's bay, and queequeg sought apassage to christian lands. but the ship, having her full complement ofseamen, spurned his suit; and not all the king his father's influencecould prevail. but queequeg vowed a vow. alone in his canoe, he paddledoff to a distant strait, which he knew the ship must pass through whenshe quitted the island. on one side was a coral reef; on the other a lowtongue of land, covered with mangrove thickets that grew out into thewater. hiding his canoe, still afloat, among these thickets, with itsprow seaward, he sat down in the stern, paddle low in hand; and when theship was gliding by, like a flash he darted out; gained her side; withone backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his canoe; climbed upthe chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the deck, grappleda ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though hacked in pieces.in vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended acutlass over his naked wrists; queequeg was the son of a king, andqueequeg budged not. struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wilddesire to visit christendom, the captain at last relented, and told himhe might make himself at home. but this fine young savage_this seaprince of wales, never saw the captain's cabin. they put him downamong the sailors, and made a whaleman of him. but like czar petercontent to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities, queequeg disdainedno seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the power ofenlightening his untutored countrymen. for at bottom_so he toldme_he was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the christians,the arts whereby to make his people still happier than they were; andmore than that, still better than they were. but, alas! the practices ofwhalemen soon convinced him that even christians could be both miserableand wicked; infinitely more so, than all his father's heathens.arrived at last in old sag harbor; and seeing what the sailors didthere; and then going on to nantucket, and seeing how they spent theirwages in that place also, poor queequeg gave it up for lost. thought he,it's a wicked world in all meridians; i'll die a pagan.and thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these christians,wore their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. hence the queerways about him, though now some time from home.by hints, i asked him whether he did not propose going back, and havinga coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, hebeing very old and feeble at the last accounts. he answered no, not yet;and added that he was fearful christianity, or rather christians, hadunfitted him for ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagankings before him. but by and by, he said, he would return,_as soon ashe felt himself baptized again. for the nonce, however, he proposed tosail about, and sow his wild oats in all four oceans. they had made aharpooneer of him, and that barbed iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.i asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his futuremovements. he answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. uponthis, i told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of myintention to sail out of nantucket, as being the most promising port foran adventurous whaleman to embark from. he at once resolved to accompanyme to that island, ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same watch,the same boat, the same mess with me, in short to share my every hap;with both my hands in his, boldly dip into the potluck of both worlds.to all this i joyously assented; for besides the affection i now feltfor queequeg, he was an experienced harpooneer, and as such, could notfail to be of great usefulness to one, who, like me, was wholly ignorantof the mysteries of whaling, though well acquainted with the sea, asknown to merchant seamen.his story being ended with his pipe's last dying puff, queequegembraced me, pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out thelight, we rolled over from each other, this way and that, and very soonwere sleeping.chapter 13. wheelbarrow.next morning, monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber,for a block, i settled my own and comrade's bill; using, however,my comrade's money. the grinning landlord, as well as the boarders,seemed amazingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung upbetween me and queequeg_especially as peter coffin's cock and bullstories about him had previously so much alarmed me concerning the veryperson whom i now companied with.we borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my ownpoor carpet-bag, and queequeg's canvas sack and hammock, away we wentdown to "the moss," the little nantucket packet schooner moored atthe wharf. as we were going along the people stared; not at queequegso much_for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in theirstreets,_but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms. but weheeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, and queequegnow and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon barbs. i askedhim why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore, andwhether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. to this, insubstance, he replied, that though what i hinted was true enough, yethe had a particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was ofassured stuff, well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimatewith the hearts of whales. in short, like many inland reapers andmowers, who go into the farmers' meadows armed with their ownscythes_though in no wise obliged to furnish them_even so, queequeg,for his own private reasons, preferred his own harpoon.shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story aboutthe first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. it was in sag harbor. the ownersof his ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry hisheavy chest to his boarding house. not to seem ignorant about thething_though in truth he was entirely so, concerning the precise wayin which to manage the barrow_queequeg puts his chest upon it;lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and marches up the wharf."why," said i, "queequeg, you might have known better than that,one would think. didn't the people laugh?"upon this, he told me another story. the people of his island ofrokovoko, it seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant waterof young cocoanuts into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; andthis punchbowl always forms the great central ornament on the braidedmat where the feast is held. now a certain grand merchant ship oncetouched at rokovoko, and its commander_from all accounts, a verystately punctilious gentleman, at least for a sea captain_thiscommander was invited to the wedding feast of queequeg's sister, apretty young princess just turned of ten. well; when all the weddingguests were assembled at the bride's bamboo cottage, this captainmarches in, and being assigned the post of honour, placed himself overagainst the punchbowl, and between the high priest and his majesty theking, queequeg's father. grace being said,_for those people havetheir grace as well as we_though queequeg told me that unlike us, whoat such times look downwards to our platters, they, on the contrary,copying the ducks, glance upwards to the great giver of allfeasts_grace, i say, being said, the high priest opens the banquet bythe immemorial ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his consecratedand consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beveragecirculates. seeing himself placed next the priest, and noting theceremony, and thinking himself_being captain of a ship_as havingplain precedence over a mere island king, especially in the king'sown house_the captain coolly proceeds to wash his hands in thepunchbowl;_taking it i suppose for a huge finger-glass. "now,"said queequeg, "what you tink now?_didn't our people laugh?"at last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the schooner.hoisting sail, it glided down the acushnet river. on one side, newbedford rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees allglittering in the clear, cold air. huge hills and mountains of casks oncasks were piled upon her wharves, and side by side the world-wanderingwhale ships lay silent and safely moored at last; while from otherscame a sound of carpenters and coopers, with blended noises of fires andforges to melt the pitch, all betokening that new cruises were on thestart; that one most perilous and long voyage ended, only begins asecond; and a second ended, only begins a third, and so on, for everand for aye. such is the endlessness, yea, the intolerableness of allearthly effort.gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the littlemoss tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt hissnortings. how i snuffed that tartar air!_how i spurned that turnpikeearth!_that common highway all over dented with the marks of slavishheels and hoofs; and turned me to admire the magnanimity of the seawhich will permit no records.at the same foam-fountain, queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.his dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed teeth.on, on we flew; and our offing gained, the moss did homage to theblast; ducked and dived her bows as a slave before the sultan. sidewaysleaning, we sideways darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire; thetwo tall masts buckling like indian canes in land tornadoes. so full ofthis reeling scene were we, as we stood by the plunging bowsprit, thatfor some time we did not notice the jeering glances of the passengers, alubber-like assembly, who marvelled that two fellow beings should be socompanionable; as though a white man were anything more dignified than awhitewashed negro. but there were some boobies and bumpkins there, who,by their intense greenness, must have come from the heart and centre ofall verdure. queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimickinghim behind his back. i thought the bumpkin's hour of doom was come.dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and byan almost miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodilyinto the air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, thefellow landed with bursting lungs upon his feet, while queequeg, turninghis back upon him, lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for apuff."capting! capting!" yelled the bumpkin, running towards thatofficer; "capting, capting, here's the devil.""hallo, you sir," cried the captain, a gaunt rib of the sea,stalking up to queequeg, "what in thunder do you mean by that? don'tyou know you might have killed that chap?""what him say?" said queequeg, as he mildly turned to me."he say," said i, "that you came near kill-e that man there,"pointing to the still shivering greenhorn."kill-e," cried queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into anunearthly expression of disdain, "ah! him bevy small-e fish-e;queequeg no kill-e so small-e fish-e; queequeg kill-e big whale!""look you," roared the captain, "i'll kill-e you, you cannibal,if you try any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye."but it so happened just then, that it was high time for the captain tomind his own eye. the prodigious strain upon the main-sail had partedthe weather-sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side toside, completely sweeping the entire after part of the deck. the poorfellow whom queequeg had handled so roughly, was swept overboard; allhands were in a panic; and to attempt snatching at the boom to stay it,seemed madness. it flew from right to left, and back again, almostin one ticking of a watch, and every instant seemed on the point ofsnapping into splinters. nothing was done, and nothing seemed capable ofbeing done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood eyeing theboom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. in themidst of this consternation, queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, andcrawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured oneend to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught itround the boom as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the sparwas that way trapped, and all was safe. the schooner was run into thewind, and while the hands were clearing away the stern boat, queequeg,stripped to the waist, darted from the side with a long living arc ofa leap. for three minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog,throwing his long arms straight out before him, and by turns revealinghis brawny shoulders through the freezing foam. i looked at the grandand glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved. the greenhorn had gonedown. shooting himself perpendicularly from the water, queequeg, nowtook an instant's glance around him, and seeming to see just howmatters were, dived down and disappeared. a few minutes more, and herose again, one arm still striking out, and with the other dragginga lifeless form. the boat soon picked them up. the poor bumpkin wasrestored. all hands voted queequeg a noble trump; the captain begged hispardon. from that hour i clove to queequeg like a barnacle; yea, tillpoor queequeg took his last long dive.was there ever such unconsciousness? he did not seem to think that he atall deserved a medal from the humane and magnanimous societies. he onlyasked for water_fresh water_something to wipe the brine off; thatdone, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against thebulwarks, and mildly eyeing those around him, seemed to be saying tohimself_"it's a mutual, joint-stock world, in all meridians. wecannibals must help these christians."chapter 14. nantucket.nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after afine run, we safely arrived in nantucket.nantucket! take out your map and look at it. see what a real corner ofthe world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonelythan the eddystone lighthouse. look at it_a mere hillock, and elbow ofsand; all beach, without a background. there is more sand there thanyou would use in twenty years as a substitute for blotting paper. somegamesome wights will tell you that they have to plant weeds there, theydon't grow naturally; that they import canada thistles; that theyhave to send beyond seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil cask;that pieces of wood in nantucket are carried about like bits of the truecross in rome; that people there plant toadstools before their houses,to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass makesan oasis, three blades in a day's walk a prairie; that they wearquicksand shoes, something like laplander snow-shoes; that they are soshut up, belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utterisland of by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clamswill sometimes be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. butthese extravaganzas only show that nantucket is no illinois.look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island wassettled by the red-men. thus goes the legend. in olden times an eagleswooped down upon the new england coast, and carried off an infantindian in his talons. with loud lament the parents saw their child borneout of sight over the wide waters. they resolved to follow in the samedirection. setting out in their canoes, after a perilous passage theydiscovered the island, and there they found an empty ivory casket,_thepoor little indian's skeleton.what wonder, then, that these nantucketers, born on a beach, should taketo the sea for a livelihood! they first caught crabs and quohogs inthe sand; grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; moreexperienced, they pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last,launching a navy of great ships on the sea, explored this watery world;put an incessant belt of circumnavigations round it; peeped in atbehring's straits; and in all seasons and all oceans declaredeverlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that has survived theflood; most monstrous and most mountainous! that himmalehan, salt-seamastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, thathis very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless andmalicious assaults!and thus have these naked nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing fromtheir ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world likeso many alexanders; parcelling out among them the atlantic, pacific, andindian oceans, as the three pirate powers did poland. let america addmexico to texas, and pile cuba upon canada; let the english overswarmall india, and hang out their blazing banner from the sun; two thirds ofthis terraqueous globe are the nantucketer's. for the sea is his; heowns it, as emperors own empires; other seamen having but a right ofway through it. merchant ships are but extension bridges; armed ones butfloating forts; even pirates and privateers, though following the seaas highwaymen the road, they but plunder other ships, other fragments ofthe land like themselves, without seeking to draw their living from thebottomless deep itself. the nantucketer, he alone resides and riots onthe sea; he alone, in bible language, goes down to it in ships; to andfro ploughing it as his own special plantation. there is his home; therelies his business, which a noah's flood would not interrupt, though itoverwhelmed all the millions in china. he lives on the sea, as prairiecocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them aschamois hunters climb the alps. for years he knows not the land; sothat when he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, morestrangely than the moon would to an earthsman. with the landless gull,that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep between billows;so at nightfall, the nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails,and lays him to his rest, while under his very pillow rush herds ofwalruses and whales.chapter 15. chowder.it was quite late in the evening when the little moss came snuglyto anchor, and queequeg and i went ashore; so we could attend to nobusiness that day, at least none but a supper and a bed. the landlord ofthe spouter-inn had recommended us to his cousin hosea hussey of thetry pots, whom he asserted to be the proprietor of one of the best kepthotels in all nantucket, and moreover he had assured us that cousinhosea, as he called him, was famous for his chowders. in short, heplainly hinted that we could not possibly do better than try pot-luck atthe try pots. but the directions he had given us about keeping a yellowwarehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church to thelarboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made acorner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the firstman we met where the place was: these crooked directions of his verymuch puzzled us at first, especially as, at the outset, queequeginsisted that the yellow warehouse_our first point of departure_mustbe left on the larboard hand, whereas i had understood peter coffin tosay it was on the starboard. however, by dint of beating about a littlein the dark, and now and then knocking up a peaceable inhabitantto inquire the way, we at last came to something which there was nomistaking.two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses' ears,swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of anold doorway. the horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the otherside, so that this old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows.perhaps i was over sensitive to such impressions at the time, but icould not help staring at this gallows with a vague misgiving. a sort ofcrick was in my neck as i gazed up to the two remaining horns; yes, twoof them, one for queequeg, and one for me. it's ominous, thinks i. acoffin my innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling port; tombstonesstaring at me in the whalemen's chapel; and here a gallows! and a pairof prodigious black pots too! are these last throwing out oblique hintstouching tophet?i was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled womanwith yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn,under a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injuredeye, and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollenshirt."get along with ye," said she to the man, "or i'll be combingye!""come on, queequeg," said i, "all right. there's mrs. hussey."and so it turned out; mr. hosea hussey being from home, but leavingmrs. hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. uponmaking known our desires for a supper and a bed, mrs. hussey, postponingfurther scolding for the present, ushered us into a little room, andseating us at a table spread with the relics of a recently concludedrepast, turned round to us and said_"clam or cod?""what's that about cods, ma'am?" said i, with much politeness."clam or cod?" she repeated."a clam for supper? a cold clam; is that what you mean, mrs.hussey?" says i, "but that's a rather cold and clammy reception inthe winter time, ain't it, mrs. hussey?"but being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purpleshirt, who was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothingbut the word "clam," mrs. hussey hurried towards an open doorleading to the kitchen, and bawling out "clam for two," disappeared."queequeg," said i, "do you think that we can make out a supperfor us both on one clam?"however, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie theapparently cheerless prospect before us. but when that smoking chowdercame in, the mystery was delightfully explained. oh, sweet friends!hearken to me. it was made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger thanhazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up intolittle flakes; the whole enriched with butter, and plentifully seasonedwith pepper and salt. our appetites being sharpened by the frostyvoyage, and in particular, queequeg seeing his favourite fishing foodbefore him, and the chowder being surpassingly excellent, we despatchedit with great expedition: when leaning back a moment and bethinking meof mrs. hussey's clam and cod announcement, i thought i would trya little experiment. stepping to the kitchen door, i uttered the word"cod" with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. in a few moments thesavoury steam came forth again, but with a different flavor, and in goodtime a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.we resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinksi to myself, i wonder now if this here has any effect on the head?what's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? "butlook, queequeg, ain't that a live eel in your bowl? where's yourharpoon?"fishiest of all fishy places was the try pots, which well deservedits name; for the pots there were always boiling chowders. chowder forbreakfast, and chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till youbegan to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes. the areabefore the house was paved with clam-shells. mrs. hussey wore a polishednecklace of codfish vertebra; and hosea hussey had his account booksbound in superior old shark-skin. there was a fishy flavor to the milk,too, which i could not at all account for, till one morning happeningto take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen's boats, i sawhosea's brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and marching alongthe sand with each foot in a cod's decapitated head, looking veryslip-shod, i assure ye.supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from mrs. husseyconcerning the nearest way to bed; but, as queequeg was about to precedeme up the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded hisharpoon; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers. "why not?" saidi; "every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon_but why not?""because it's dangerous," says she. "ever since young stiggscoming from that unfort'nt v'y'ge of his, when he was gone fouryears and a half, with only three barrels of ile, was found dead in myfirst floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then i allowno boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. so,mr. queequeg" (for she had learned his name), "i will just take thishere iron, and keep it for you till morning. but the chowder; clam orcod to-morrow for breakfast, men?""both," says i; "and let's have a couple of smoked herring byway of variety."chapter 16. the ship.in bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. but to my surprise andno small concern, queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had beendiligently consulting yojo_the name of his black little god_andyojo had told him two or three times over, and strongly insisted upon iteveryway, that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet inharbor, and in concert selecting our craft; instead of this, i say, yojoearnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest whollywith me, inasmuch as yojo purposed befriending us; and, in order todo so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to myself, i,ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though ithad turned out by chance; and in that vessel i must immediately shipmyself, for the present irrespective of queequeg.i have forgotten to mention that, in many things, queequeg placedgreat confidence in the excellence of yojo's judgment and surprisingforecast of things; and cherished yojo with considerable esteem, as arather good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole,but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs.now, this plan of queequeg's, or rather yojo's, touching theselection of our craft; i did not like that plan at all. i had not alittle relied upon queequeg's sagacity to point out the whalerbest fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely. but as all myremonstrances produced no effect upon queequeg, i was obliged toacquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with adetermined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should quickly settlethat trifling little affair. next morning early, leaving queequeg shutup with yojo in our little bedroom_for it seemed that it was somesort of lent or ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayerwith queequeg and yojo that day; how it was i never could find out, for,though i applied myself to it several times, i never could master hisliturgies and xxxix articles_leaving queequeg, then, fasting on histomahawk pipe, and yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire ofshavings, i sallied out among the shipping. after much prolongedsauntering and many random inquiries, i learnt that there were threeships up for three-years' voyages_the devil-dam, the tit-bit, andthe pequod. devil-dam, i do not know the origin of; tit-bit is obvious;pequod, you will no doubt remember, was the name of a celebrated tribeof massachusetts indians; now extinct as the ancient medes. i peeredand pryed about the devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the tit-bit; andfinally, going on board the pequod, looked around her for a moment, andthen decided that this was the very ship for us.you may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught iknow;_square-toed luggers; mountainous japanese junks; butter-boxgalliots, and what not; but take my word for it, you never saw such arare old craft as this same rare old pequod. she was a ship of the oldschool, rather small if anything; with an old-fashioned claw-footed lookabout her. long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons and calmsof all four oceans, her old hull's complexion was darkened like afrench grenadier's, who has alike fought in egypt and siberia. hervenerable bows looked bearded. her masts_cut somewhere on the coast ofjapan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale_her mastsstood stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of cologne.her ancient decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshippedflag-stone in canterbury cathedral where becket bled. but to all theseher old antiquities, were added new and marvellous features, pertainingto the wild business that for more than half a century she had followed.old captain peleg, many years her chief-mate, before he commandedanother vessel of his own, and now a retired seaman, and one of theprincipal owners of the pequod,_this old peleg, during the term of hischief-mateship, had built upon her original grotesqueness, and inlaidit, all over, with a quaintness both of material and device, unmatchedby anything except it be thorkill-hake's carved buckler or bedstead.she was apparelled like any barbaric ethiopian emperor, his neck heavywith pendants of polished ivory. she was a thing of trophies. a cannibalof a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies.all round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were garnished like onecontinuous jaw, with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, insertedthere for pins, to fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. thosethews ran not through base blocks of land wood, but deftly travelledover sheaves of sea-ivory. scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverendhelm, she sported there a tiller; and that tiller was in one mass,curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe.the helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt like thetartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw. a noblecraft, but somehow a most melancholy! all noble things are touched withthat.now when i looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having authority,in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at first i sawnobody; but i could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, orrather wigwam, pitched a little behind the main-mast. it seemed onlya temporary erection used in port. it was of a conical shape, some tenfeet high; consisting of the long, huge slabs of limber black bone takenfrom the middle and highest part of the jaws of the right-whale.planted with their broad ends on the deck, a circle of these slabs lacedtogether, mutually sloped towards each other, and at the apex united ina tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved to and fro like thetop-knot on some old pottowottamie sachem's head. a triangular openingfaced towards the bows of the ship, so that the insider commanded acomplete view forward.and half concealed in this queer tenement, i at length found one whoby his aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and theship's work suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden ofcommand. he was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling allover with curious carving; and the bottom of which was formed of astout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam wasconstructed.there was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance ofthe elderly man i saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen,and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the quaker style;only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the minutestwrinkles interlacing round his eyes, which must have arisen fromhis continual sailings in many hard gales, and always looking towindward;_for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursedtogether. such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl."is this the captain of the pequod?" said i, advancing to the doorof the tent."supposing it be the captain of the pequod, what dost thou want ofhim?" he demanded."i was thinking of shipping.""thou wast, wast thou? i see thou art no nantucketer_ever been in astove boat?""no, sir, i never have.""dost know nothing at all about whaling, i dare say_eh?"nothing, sir; but i have no doubt i shall soon learn. i've beenseveral voyages in the merchant service, and i think that_""merchant service be damned. talk not that lingo to me. dost see thatleg?_i'll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest ofthe marchant service to me again. marchant service indeed! i suppose nowye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships.but flukes! man, what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?_it looksa little suspicious, don't it, eh?_hast not been a pirate, hastthou?_didst not rob thy last captain, didst thou?_dost not think ofmurdering the officers when thou gettest to sea?"i protested my innocence of these things. i saw that under the maskof these half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulatedquakerish nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and ratherdistrustful of all aliens, unless they hailed from cape cod or thevineyard."but what takes thee a-whaling? i want to know that before i think ofshipping ye.""well, sir, i want to see what whaling is. i want to see the world.""want to see what whaling is, eh? have ye clapped eye on captainahab?""who is captain ahab, sir?""aye, aye, i thought so. captain ahab is the captain of this ship.""i am mistaken then. i thought i was speaking to the captainhimself.""thou art speaking to captain peleg_that's who ye are speaking to,young man. it belongs to me and captain bildad to see the pequod fittedout for the voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. weare part owners and agents. but as i was going to say, if thou wantestto know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye do, i can put ye in a way offinding it out before ye bind yourself to it, past backing out. clapeye on captain ahab, young man, and thou wilt find that he has only oneleg.""what do you mean, sir? was the other one lost by a whale?""lost by a whale! young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured,chewed up, crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped aboat!_ah, ah!"i was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched atthe hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly asi could, "what you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could iknow there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, thoughindeed i might have inferred as much from the simple fact of theaccident.""look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d'ye see;thou dost not talk shark a bit. sure, ye've been to sea before now;sure of that?""sir," said i, "i thought i told you that i had been four voyagesin the merchant_""hard down out of that! mind what i said about the marchantservice_don't aggravate me_i won't have it. but let usunderstand each other. i have given thee a hint about what whaling is;do ye yet feel inclined for it?""i do, sir.""very good. now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a livewhale's throat, and then jump after it? answer, quick!""i am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not tobe got rid of, that is; which i don't take to be the fact.""good again. now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to findout by experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order tosee the world? was not that what ye said? i thought so. well then, juststep forward there, and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then backto me and tell me what ye see there."for a moment i stood a little puzzled by this curious request, notknowing exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest.but concentrating all his crow's feet into one scowl, captain pelegstarted me on the errand.going forward and glancing over the weather bow, i perceived that theship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquelypointing towards the open ocean. the prospect was unlimited, butexceedingly monotonous and forbidding; not the slightest variety that icould see."well, what's the report?" said peleg when i came back; "whatdid ye see?""not much," i replied_"nothing but water; considerable horizonthough, and there's a squall coming up, i think.""well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? do ye wish togo round cape horn to see any more of it, eh? can't ye see the worldwhere you stand?"i was a little staggered, but go a-whaling i must, and i would; and thepequod was as good a ship as any_i thought the best_and all thisi now repeated to peleg. seeing me so determined, he expressed hiswillingness to ship me."and thou mayest as well sign the papers right off," headded_"come along with ye." and so saying, he led the way belowdeck into the cabin.seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon andsurprising figure. it turned out to be captain bildad, who along withcaptain peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel; the othershares, as is sometimes the case in these ports, being held by a crowdof old annuitants; widows, fatherless children, and chancery wards; eachowning about the value of a timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nailor two in the ship. people in nantucket invest their money in whalingvessels, the same way that you do yours in approved state stocksbringing in good interest.now, bildad, like peleg, and indeed many other nantucketers, was aquaker, the island having been originally settled by that sect; and tothis day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure thepeculiarities of the quaker, only variously and anomalously modifiedby things altogether alien and heterogeneous. for some of these samequakers are the most sanguinary of all sailors and whale-hunters. theyare fighting quakers; they are quakers with a vengeance.so that there are instances among them of men, who, named with scripturenames_a singularly common fashion on the island_and in childhoodnaturally imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the quakeridiom; still, from the audacious, daring, and boundless adventureof their subsequent lives, strangely blend with these unoutgrownpeculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of character, not unworthy ascandinavian sea-king, or a poetical pagan roman. and when these thingsunite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a globular brainand a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and seclusionof many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and beneathconstellations never seen here at the north, been led to thinkuntraditionally and independently; receiving all nature's sweet orsavage impressions fresh from her own virgin voluntary and confidingbreast, and thereby chiefly, but with some help from accidentaladvantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty language_that man makesone in a whole nation's census_a mighty pageant creature, formedfor noble tragedies. nor will it at all detract from him, dramaticallyregarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what seemsa half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. for allmen tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. be sureof this, o young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. but,as yet we have not to do with such an one, but with quite another; andstill a man, who, if indeed peculiar, it only results again from anotherphase of the quaker, modified by individual circumstances.like captain peleg, captain bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman.but unlike captain peleg_who cared not a rush for what are calledserious things, and indeed deemed those self-same serious things theveriest of all trifles_captain bildad had not only been originallyeducated according to the strictest sect of nantucket quakerism, but allhis subsequent ocean life, and the sight of many unclad, lovely islandcreatures, round the horn_all that had not moved this native bornquaker one single jot, had not so much as altered one angle of hisvest. still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack ofcommon consistency about worthy captain bildad. though refusing, fromconscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himselfhad illimitably invaded the atlantic and pacific; and though a sworn foeto human bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tunsupon tuns of leviathan gore. how now in the contemplative evening of hisdays, the pious bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, i donot know; but it did not seem to concern him much, and very probably hehad long since come to the sage and sensible conclusion that a man'sreligion is one thing, and this practical world quite another. thisworld pays dividends. rising from a little cabin-boy in short clothesof the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad shad-bellied waistcoat;from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and captain, and finally aship owner; bildad, as i hinted before, had concluded his adventurouscareer by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age ofsixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of hiswell-earned income.now, bildad, i am sorry to say, had the reputation of being anincorrigible old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hardtask-master. they told me in nantucket, though it certainly seems acurious story, that when he sailed the old categut whaleman, his crew,upon arriving home, were mostly all carried ashore to the hospital, soreexhausted and worn out. for a pious man, especially for a quaker, he wascertainly rather hard-hearted, to say the least. he never used to swear,though, at his men, they said; but somehow he got an inordinatequantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. when bildad was achief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at you, madeyou feel completely nervous, till you could clutch something_a hammeror a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at something or other,never mind what. indolence and idleness perished before him. his ownperson was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character. on hislong, gaunt body, he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard,his chin having a soft, economical nap to it, like the worn nap of hisbroad-brimmed hat.such, then, was the person that i saw seated on the transom when ifollowed captain peleg down into the cabin. the space between the deckswas small; and there, bolt-upright, sat old bildad, who always sat so,and never leaned, and this to save his coat tails. his broad-brim wasplaced beside him; his legs were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture wasbuttoned up to his chin; and spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed inreading from a ponderous volume."bildad," cried captain peleg, "at it again, bildad, eh? ye havebeen studying those scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to mycertain knowledge. how far ye got, bildad?"as if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate,bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up, andseeing me, glanced again inquiringly towards peleg."he says he's our man, bildad," said peleg, "he wants toship.""dost thee?" said bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me."i dost," said i unconsciously, he was so intense a quaker."what do ye think of him, bildad?" said peleg."he'll do," said bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling awayat his book in a mumbling tone quite audible.i thought him the queerest old quaker i ever saw, especially as peleg,his friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. but i saidnothing, only looking round me sharply. peleg now threw open a chest,and drawing forth the ship's articles, placed pen and ink before him,and seated himself at a little table. i began to think it was high timeto settle with myself at what terms i would be willing to engage for thevoyage. i was already aware that in the whaling business they paid nowages; but all hands, including the captain, received certain shares ofthe profits called lays, and that these lays were proportioned to thedegree of importance pertaining to the respective duties of the ship'scompany. i was also aware that being a green hand at whaling, my ownlay would not be very large; but considering that i was used to the sea,could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, i made no doubt thatfrom all i had heard i should be offered at least the 275th lay_thatis, the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whateverthat might eventually amount to. and though the 275th lay was what theycall a rather long lay, yet it was better than nothing; and if we had alucky voyage, might pretty nearly pay for the clothing i would wear outon it, not to speak of my three years' beef and board, for which iwould not have to pay one stiver.it might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princelyfortune_and so it was, a very poor way indeed. but i am one of thosethat never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if theworld is ready to board and lodge me, while i am putting up at this grimsign of the thunder cloud. upon the whole, i thought that the 275th laywould be about the fair thing, but would not have been surprised had ibeen offered the 200th, considering i was of a broad-shouldered make.but one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful aboutreceiving a generous share of the profits was this: ashore, i had heardsomething of both captain peleg and his unaccountable old crony bildad;how that they being the principal proprietors of the pequod, thereforethe other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly thewhole management of the ship's affairs to these two. and i did notknow but what the stingy old bildad might have a mighty deal to sayabout shipping hands, especially as i now found him on board the pequod,quite at home there in the cabin, and reading his bible as if at hisown fireside. now while peleg was vainly trying to mend a pen with hisjack-knife, old bildad, to my no small surprise, considering that he wassuch an interested party in these proceedings; bildad never heededus, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, "lay not up foryourselves treasures upon earth, where moth_""well, captain bildad," interrupted peleg, "what d'ye say, whatlay shall we give this young man?""thou knowest best," was the sepulchral reply, "the seven hundredand seventy-seventh wouldn't be too much, would it?__where mothand rust do corrupt, but lay__"lay, indeed, thought i, and such a lay! the seven hundred andseventy-seventh! well, old bildad, you are determined that i, for one,shall not lay up many lays here below, where moth and rust do corrupt.it was an exceedingly long lay that, indeed; and though from themagnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yetthe slightest consideration will show that though seven hundred andseventy-seven is a pretty large number, yet, when you come to makea teenth of it, you will then see, i say, that the seven hundred andseventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal less than sevenhundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so i thought at the time."why, blast your eyes, bildad," cried peleg, "thou dost not wantto swindle this young man! he must have more than that.""seven hundred and seventy-seventh," again said bildad, withoutlifting his eyes; and then went on mumbling_"for where your treasureis, there will your heart be also.""i am going to put him down for the three hundredth," said peleg,"do ye hear that, bildad! the three hundredth lay, i say."bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said,"captain peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider theduty thou owest to the other owners of this ship_widows and orphans,many of them_and that if we too abundantly reward the labors ofthis young man, we may be taking the bread from those widows and thoseorphans. the seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay, captain peleg.""thou bildad!" roared peleg, starting up and clattering about thecabin. "blast ye, captain bildad, if i had followed thy advice inthese matters, i would afore now had a conscience to lug about thatwould be heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed roundcape horn.""captain peleg," said bildad steadily, "thy conscience may bedrawing ten inches of water, or ten fathoms, i can't tell; but asthou art still an impenitent man, captain peleg, i greatly fear lest thyconscience be but a leaky one; and will in the end sink thee founderingdown to the fiery pit, captain peleg.""fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, yeinsult me. it's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature thathe's bound to hell. flukes and flames! bildad, say that again to me,and start my soul-bolts, but i'll_i'll_yes, i'll swallow alive goat with all his hair and horns on. out of the cabin, ye canting,drab-coloured son of a wooden gun_a straight wake with ye!"as he thundered out this he made a rush at bildad, but with a marvellousoblique, sliding celerity, bildad for that time eluded him.alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal andresponsible owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give upall idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarilycommanded, i stepped aside from the door to give egress to bildad, who,i made no doubt, was all eagerness to vanish from before the awakenedwrath of peleg. but to my astonishment, he sat down again on thetransom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest intention ofwithdrawing. he seemed quite used to impenitent peleg and his ways. asfor peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no moreleft in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitcheda little as if still nervously agitated. "whew!" he whistled atlast_"the squall's gone off to leeward, i think. bildad, thou usedto be good at sharpening a lance, mend that pen, will ye. my jack-knifehere needs the grindstone. that's he; thank ye, bildad. now then, myyoung man, ishmael's thy name, didn't ye say? well then, down ye gohere, ishmael, for the three hundredth lay.""captain peleg," said i, "i have a friend with me who wants toship too_shall i bring him down to-morrow?""to be sure," said peleg. "fetch him along, and we'll look athim.""what lay does he want?" groaned bildad, glancing up from the bookin which he had again been burying himself."oh! never thee mind about that, bildad," said peleg. "has he everwhaled it any?" turning to me."killed more whales than i can count, captain peleg.""well, bring him along then."and, after signing the papers, off i went; nothing doubting but that ihad done a good morning's work, and that the pequod was the identicalship that yojo had provided to carry queequeg and me round the cape.but i had not proceeded far, when i began to bethink me that the captainwith whom i was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though, indeed, inmany cases, a whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and receive allher crew on board, ere the captain makes himself visible by arrivingto take command; for sometimes these voyages are so prolonged, and theshore intervals at home so exceedingly brief, that if the captain havea family, or any absorbing concernment of that sort, he does not troublehimself much about his ship in port, but leaves her to the owners tillall is ready for sea. however, it is always as well to have a look athim before irrevocably committing yourself into his hands. turning backi accosted captain peleg, inquiring where captain ahab was to be found."and what dost thou want of captain ahab? it's all right enough;thou art shipped.""yes, but i should like to see him.""but i don't think thou wilt be able to at present. i don't knowexactly what's the matter with him; but he keeps close inside thehouse; a sort of sick, and yet he don't look so. in fact, he ain'tsick; but no, he isn't well either. any how, young man, he won'talways see me, so i don't suppose he will thee. he's a queer man,captain ahab_so some think_but a good one. oh, thou'lt like himwell enough; no fear, no fear. he's a grand, ungodly, god-like man,captain ahab; doesn't speak much; but, when he does speak, then youmay well listen. mark ye, be forewarned; ahab's above the common;ahab's been in colleges, as well as _mong the cannibals; been usedto deeper wonders than the waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier,stranger foes than whales. his lance! aye, the keenest and the surestthat out of all our isle! oh! he ain't captain bildad; no, and heain't captain peleg; he's ahab, boy; and ahab of old, thou knowest,was a crowned king!""and a very vile one. when that wicked king was slain, the dogs, didthey not lick his blood?""come hither to me_hither, hither," said peleg, with asignificance in his eye that almost startled me. "look ye, lad; neversay that on board the pequod. never say it anywhere. captain ahab didnot name himself. _twas a foolish, ignorant whim of his crazy, widowedmother, who died when he was only a twelvemonth old. and yet theold squaw tistig, at gayhead, said that the name would somehow proveprophetic. and, perhaps, other fools like her may tell thee the same. iwish to warn thee. it's a lie. i know captain ahab well; i've sailedwith him as mate years ago; i know what he is_a good man_not apious, good man, like bildad, but a swearing good man_something likeme_only there's a good deal more of him. aye, aye, i know that hewas never very jolly; and i know that on the passage home, he was alittle out of his mind for a spell; but it was the sharp shooting painsin his bleeding stump that brought that about, as any one might see. iknow, too, that ever since he lost his leg last voyage by that accursedwhale, he's been a kind of moody_desperate moody, and savagesometimes; but that will all pass off. and once for all, let me tellthee and assure thee, young man, it's better to sail with a moody goodcaptain than a laughing bad one. so good-bye to thee_and wrong notcaptain ahab, because he happens to have a wicked name. besides, my boy,he has a wife_not three voyages wedded_a sweet, resigned girl. thinkof that; by that sweet girl that old man has a child: hold ye thenthere can be any utter, hopeless harm in ahab? no, no, my lad; stricken,blasted, if he be, ahab has his humanities!"as i walked away, i was full of thoughtfulness; what had beenincidentally revealed to me of captain ahab, filled me with a certainwild vagueness of painfulness concerning him. and somehow, at the time,i felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him, but for i don't know what,unless it was the cruel loss of his leg. and yet i also felt a strangeawe of him; but that sort of awe, which i cannot at all describe, wasnot exactly awe; i do not know what it was. but i felt it; and it didnot disincline me towards him; though i felt impatience at what seemedlike mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then. however,my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so that for thepresent dark ahab slipped my mind.chapter 17. the ramadan.as queequeg's ramadan, or fasting and humiliation, was to continueall day, i did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; fori cherish the greatest respect towards everybody's religiousobligations, never mind how comical, and could not find it in my heartto undervalue even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad-stool; orthose other creatures in certain parts of our earth, who with a degreeof footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets, bow down beforethe torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on account of theinordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.i say, we good presbyterian christians should be charitable in thesethings, and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals,pagans and what not, because of their half-crazy conceits on thesesubjects. there was queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the mostabsurd notions about yojo and his ramadan;_but what of that? queequegthought he knew what he was about, i suppose; he seemed to be content;and there let him rest. all our arguing with him would not avail; lethim be, i say: and heaven have mercy on us all_presbyterians andpagans alike_for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked about the head,and sadly need mending.towards evening, when i felt assured that all his performances andrituals must be over, i went up to his room and knocked at the door;but no answer. i tried to open it, but it was fastened inside."queequeg," said i softly through the key-hole:_all silent. "isay, queequeg! why don't you speak? it's i_ishmael." but allremained still as before. i began to grow alarmed. i had allowed himsuch abundant time; i thought he might have had an apoplectic fit. ilooked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner ofthe room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. icould only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall,but nothing more. i was surprised to behold resting against the wallthe wooden shaft of queequeg's harpoon, which the landlady theevening previous had taken from him, before our mounting to the chamber.that's strange, thought i; but at any rate, since the harpoon standsyonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad without it, therefore he mustbe inside here, and no possible mistake."queequeg!_queequeg!"_all still. something must have happened.apoplexy! i tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted.running down stairs, i quickly stated my suspicions to the firstperson i met_the chamber-maid. "la! la!" she cried, "i thoughtsomething must be the matter. i went to make the bed after breakfast,and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard; and it's beenjust so silent ever since. but i thought, may be, you had both goneoff and locked your baggage in for safe keeping. la! la,ma'am!_mistress! murder! mrs. hussey! apoplexy!"_and with thesecries, she ran towards the kitchen, i following.mrs. hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and avinegar-cruet in the other, having just broken away from the occupationof attending to the castors, and scolding her little black boy meantime."wood-house!" cried i, "which way to it? run for god's sake, andfetch something to pry open the door_the axe!_the axe! he's had astroke; depend upon it!"_and so saying i was unmethodicallyrushing up stairs again empty-handed, when mrs. hussey interposed themustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor of her countenance."what's the matter with you, young man?""get the axe! for god's sake, run for the doctor, some one, while ipry it open!""look here," said the landlady, quickly putting down thevinegar-cruet, so as to have one hand free; "look here; are youtalking about prying open any of my doors?"_and with that she seizedmy arm. "what's the matter with you? what's the matter with you,shipmate?"in as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, i gave her to understand thewhole case. unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of hernose, she ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed_"no! i haven'tseen it since i put it there." running to a little closet under thelanding of the stairs, she glanced in, and returning, told me thatqueequeg's harpoon was missing. "he's killed himself," shecried. "it's unfort'nate stiggs done over again_there goesanother counterpane_god pity his poor mother!_it will be the ruinof my house. has the poor lad a sister? where's that girl?_there,betty, go to snarles the painter, and tell him to paint me asign, with_"no suicides permitted here, and no smoking in theparlor;"_might as well kill both birds at once. kill? the lord bemerciful to his ghost! what's that noise there? you, young man, avastthere!"and running up after me, she caught me as i was again trying to forceopen the door."i don't allow it; i won't have my premises spoiled. go for thelocksmith, there's one about a mile from here. but avast!" puttingher hand in her side-pocket, "here's a key that'll fit, i guess;let's see." and with that, she turned it in the lock; but, alas!queequeg's supplemental bolt remained unwithdrawn within."have to burst it open," said i, and was running down the entry alittle, for a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowingi should not break down her premises; but i tore from her, and with asudden bodily rush dashed myself full against the mark.with a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slammingagainst the wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, goodheavens! there sat queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; rightin the middle of the room; squatting on his hams, and holding yojo ontop of his head. he looked neither one way nor the other way, but satlike a carved image with scarce a sign of active life."queequeg," said i, going up to him, "queequeg, what's thematter with you?""he hain't been a sittin' so all day, has he?" said thelandlady.but all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; i almost feltlike pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almostintolerable, it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained;especially, as in all probability he had been sitting so for upwards ofeight or ten hours, going too without his regular meals."mrs. hussey," said i, "he's alive at all events; so leave us,if you please, and i will see to this strange affair myself."closing the door upon the landlady, i endeavored to prevail uponqueequeg to take a chair; but in vain. there he sat; and all he coulddo_for all my polite arts and blandishments_he would not move a peg,nor say a single word, nor even look at me, nor notice my presence inthe slightest way.i wonder, thought i, if this can possibly be a part of his ramadan; dothey fast on their hams that way in his native island. it must be so;yes, it's part of his creed, i suppose; well, then, let him rest;he'll get up sooner or later, no doubt. it can't last for ever,thank god, and his ramadan only comes once a year; and i don't believeit's very punctual then.i went down to supper. after sitting a long time listening to the longstories of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage, asthey called it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig,confined to the north of the line, in the atlantic ocean only); afterlistening to these plum-puddingers till nearly eleven o'clock, i wentup stairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure by this time queequeg mustcertainly have brought his ramadan to a termination. but no; there hewas just where i had left him; he had not stirred an inch. i began togrow vexed with him; it seemed so downright senseless and insane to besitting there all day and half the night on his hams in a cold room,holding a piece of wood on his head."for heaven's sake, queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up andhave some supper. you'll starve; you'll kill yourself, queequeg."but not a word did he reply.despairing of him, therefore, i determined to go to bed and to sleep;and no doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. but previous toturning in, i took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, asit promised to be a very cold night; and he had nothing but his ordinaryround jacket on. for some time, do all i would, i could not get intothe faintest doze. i had blown out the candle; and the mere thought ofqueequeg_not four feet off_sitting there in that uneasy position,stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really wretched. think ofit; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake pagan on hishams in this dreary, unaccountable ramadan!but somehow i dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break ofday; when, looking over the bedside, there squatted queequeg, as if hehad been screwed down to the floor. but as soon as the first glimpse ofsun entered the window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints,but with a cheerful look; limped towards me where i lay; pressed hisforehead again against mine; and said his ramadan was over.now, as i before hinted, i have no objection to any person's religion,be it what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult anyother person, because that other person don't believe it also. butwhen a man's religion becomes really frantic; when it is a positivetorment to him; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours an uncomfortableinn to lodge in; then i think it high time to take that individual asideand argue the point with him.and just so i now did with queequeg. "queequeg," said i, "get intobed now, and lie and listen to me." i then went on, beginning withthe rise and progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to thevarious religions of the present time, during which time i laboredto show queequeg that all these lents, ramadans, and prolongedham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms were stark nonsense; bad for thehealth; useless for the soul; opposed, in short, to the obvious laws ofhygiene and common sense. i told him, too, that he being in other thingssuch an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it pained me, verybadly pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about thisridiculous ramadan of his. besides, argued i, fasting makes the bodycave in; hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fastmust necessarily be half-starved. this is the reason why most dyspepticreligionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. inone word, queequeg, said i, rather digressively; hell is an idea firstborn on an undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated throughthe hereditary dyspepsias nurtured by ramadans.i then asked queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled withdyspepsia; expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take itin. he said no; only upon one memorable occasion. it was after a greatfeast given by his father the king, on the gaining of a great battlewherein fifty of the enemy had been killed by about two o'clock in theafternoon, and all cooked and eaten that very evening."no more, queequeg," said i, shuddering; "that will do;" fori knew the inferences without his further hinting them. i had seen asailor who had visited that very island, and he told me that it was thecustom, when a great battle had been gained there, to barbecue all theslain in the yard or garden of the victor; and then, one by one, theywere placed in great wooden trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau,with breadfruit and cocoanuts; and with some parsley in their mouths,were sent round with the victor's compliments to all his friends, justas though these presents were so many christmas turkeys.after all, i do not think that my remarks about religion made muchimpression upon queequeg. because, in the first place, he somehow seemeddull of hearing on that important subject, unless considered from hisown point of view; and, in the second place, he did not more than onethird understand me, couch my ideas simply as i would; and, finally, heno doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the true religion thani did. he looked at me with a sort of condescending concern andcompassion, as though he thought it a great pity that such a sensibleyoung man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical pagan piety.at last we rose and dressed; and queequeg, taking a prodigiously heartybreakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should notmake much profit by reason of his ramadan, we sallied out to board thepequod, sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.chapter 18. his mark.as we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, queequegcarrying his harpoon, captain peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed usfrom his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal,and furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft,unless they previously produced their papers."what do you mean by that, captain peleg?" said i, now jumping onthe bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf."i mean," he replied, "he must show his papers.""yes," said captain bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his headfrom behind peleg's, out of the wigwam. "he must show that he'sconverted. son of darkness," he added, turning to queequeg, "artthou at present in communion with any christian church?""why," said i, "he's a member of the first congregationalchurch." here be it said, that many tattooed savages sailing innantucket ships at last come to be converted into the churches."first congregational church," cried bildad, "what! that worshipsin deacon deuteronomy coleman's meeting-house?" and so saying,taking out his spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandanahandkerchief, and putting them on very carefully, came out of thewigwam, and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks, took a good long look atqueequeg."how long hath he been a member?" he then said, turning to me;"not very long, i rather guess, young man.""no," said peleg, "and he hasn't been baptized right either, orit would have washed some of that devil's blue off his face.""do tell, now," cried bildad, "is this philistine a regular memberof deacon deuteronomy's meeting? i never saw him going there, and ipass it every lord's day.""i don't know anything about deacon deuteronomy or his meeting,"said i; "all i know is, that queequeg here is a born member of thefirst congregational church. he is a deacon himself, queequeg is.""young man," said bildad sternly, "thou art skylarking withme_explain thyself, thou young hittite. what church dost thee mean?answer me."finding myself thus hard pushed, i replied. "i mean, sir, the sameancient catholic church to which you and i, and captain peleg there, andqueequeg here, and all of us, and every mother's son and soul ofus belong; the great and everlasting first congregation of this wholeworshipping world; we all belong to that; only some of us cherish somequeer crotchets no ways touching the grand belief; in that we all joinhands.""splice, thou mean'st splice hands," cried peleg, drawing nearer."young man, you'd better ship for a missionary, instead of afore-mast hand; i never heard a better sermon. deacon deuteronomy_whyfather mapple himself couldn't beat it, and he's reckoned something.come aboard, come aboard; never mind about the papers. i say, tellquohog there_what's that you call him? tell quohog to step along. bythe great anchor, what a harpoon he's got there! looks like good stuffthat; and he handles it about right. i say, quohog, or whatever yourname is, did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you everstrike a fish?"without saying a word, queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped uponthe bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boatshanging to the side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising hisharpoon, cried out in some such way as this:_"cap'ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? you see him?well, spose him one whale eye, well, den!" and taking sharp aim at it,he darted the iron right over old bildad's broad brim, clean acrossthe ship's decks, and struck the glistening tar spot out of sight."now," said queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, "spos-ee himwhale-e eye; why, dad whale dead.""quick, bildad," said peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the closevicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin gangway."quick, i say, you bildad, and get the ship's papers. we must havehedgehog there, i mean quohog, in one of our boats. look ye, quohog,we'll give ye the ninetieth lay, and that's more than ever was givena harpooneer yet out of nantucket."so down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy queequeg was soonenrolled among the same ship's company to which i myself belonged.when all preliminaries were over and peleg had got everything ready forsigning, he turned to me and said, "i guess, quohog there don't knowhow to write, does he? i say, quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy nameor make thy mark?"but at this question, queequeg, who had twice or thrice before takenpart in similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking theoffered pen, copied upon the paper, in the proper place, an exactcounterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm;so that through captain peleg's obstinate mistake touching hisappellative, it stood something like this:_quohog. his x mark.meanwhile captain bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing queequeg,and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of hisbroad-skirted drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting oneentitled "the latter day coming; or no time to lose," placed it inqueequeg's hands, and then grasping them and the book with both his,looked earnestly into his eyes, and said, "son of darkness, i must domy duty by thee; i am part owner of this ship, and feel concerned forthe souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest to thy pagan ways,which i sadly fear, i beseech thee, remain not for aye a belialbondsman. spurn the idol bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from thewrath to come; mind thine eye, i say; oh! goodness gracious! steer clearof the fiery pit!"something of the salt sea yet lingered in old bildad's language,heterogeneously mixed with scriptural and domestic phrases."avast there, avast there, bildad, avast now spoiling ourharpooneer," cried peleg. "pious harpooneers never make goodvoyagers_it takes the shark out of _em; no harpooneer is worth astraw who aint pretty sharkish. there was young nat swaine, once thebravest boat-header out of all nantucket and the vineyard; he joined themeeting, and never came to good. he got so frightened about his plaguysoul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear ofafter-claps, in case he got stove and went to davy jones.""peleg! peleg!" said bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, "thouthyself, as i myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest,peleg, what it is to have the fear of death; how, then, can'st thouprate in this ungodly guise. thou beliest thine own heart, peleg. tellme, when this same pequod here had her three masts overboard in thattyphoon on japan, that same voyage when thou went mate with captainahab, did'st thou not think of death and the judgment then?""hear him, hear him now," cried peleg, marching across the cabin,and thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,_"hear him, allof ye. think of that! when every moment we thought the ship would sink!death and the judgment then? what? with all three masts making such aneverlasting thundering against the side; and every sea breaking over us,fore and aft. think of death and the judgment then? no! no time to thinkabout death then. life was what captain ahab and i was thinking of;and how to save all hands_how to rig jury-masts_how to get into thenearest port; that was what i was thinking of."bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck,where we followed him. there he stood, very quietly overlooking somesailmakers who were mending a top-sail in the waist. now and thenhe stooped to pick up a patch, or save an end of tarred twine, whichotherwise might have been wasted.chapter 19. the prophet."shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?"queequeg and i had just left the pequod, and were sauntering away fromthe water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, whenthe above words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us,levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question. he was butshabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of ablack handkerchief investing his neck. a confluent small-pox had in alldirections flowed over his face, and left it like the complicated ribbedbed of a torrent, when the rushing waters have been dried up."have ye shipped in her?" he repeated."you mean the ship pequod, i suppose," said i, trying to gain alittle more time for an uninterrupted look at him."aye, the pequod_that ship there," he said, drawing back his wholearm, and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixedbayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object."yes," said i, "we have just signed the articles.""anything down there about your souls?""about what?""oh, perhaps you hav'n't got any," he said quickly. "no matterthough, i know many chaps that hav'n't got any,_good luck to_em; and they are all the better off for it. a soul's a sort of afifth wheel to a wagon.""what are you jabbering about, shipmate?" said i."he's got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of thatsort in other chaps," abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervousemphasis upon the word he."queequeg," said i, "let's go; this fellow has broken loosefrom somewhere; he's talking about something and somebody we don'tknow.""stop!" cried the stranger. "ye said true_ye hav'n't seenold thunder yet, have ye?""who's old thunder?" said i, again riveted with the insaneearnestness of his manner."captain ahab.""what! the captain of our ship, the pequod?""aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. yehav'n't seen him yet, have ye?""no, we hav'n't. he's sick they say, but is getting better, andwill be all right again before long.""all right again before long!" laughed the stranger, with a solemnlyderisive sort of laugh. "look ye; when captain ahab is all right, thenthis left arm of mine will be all right; not before.""what do you know about him?""what did they tell you about him? say that!""they didn't tell much of anything about him; only i've heard thathe's a good whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.""that's true, that's true_yes, both true enough. but you mustjump when he gives an order. step and growl; growl and go_that's theword with captain ahab. but nothing about that thing that happened tohim off cape horn, long ago, when he lay like dead for three days andnights; nothing about that deadly skrimmage with the spaniard afore thealtar in santa?_heard nothing about that, eh? nothing about the silvercalabash he spat into? and nothing about his losing his leg last voyage,according to the prophecy. didn't ye hear a word about them mattersand something more, eh? no, i don't think ye did; how could ye? whoknows it? not all nantucket, i guess. but hows'ever, mayhap, ye'veheard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard ofthat, i dare say. oh yes, that every one knows a'most_i mean theyknow he's only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.""my friend," said i, "what all this gibberish of yours is about, idon't know, and i don't much care; for it seems to me that you mustbe a little damaged in the head. but if you are speaking of captainahab, of that ship there, the pequod, then let me tell you, that i knowall about the loss of his leg.""all about it, eh_sure you do?_all?""pretty sure."with finger pointed and eye levelled at the pequod, the beggar-likestranger stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting alittle, turned and said:_"ye've shipped, have ye? names down onthe papers? well, well, what's signed, is signed; and what's tobe, will be; and then again, perhaps it won't be, after all. anyhow,it's all fixed and arranged a'ready; and some sailors or other mustgo with him, i suppose; as well these as any other men, god pity _em!morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless ye; i'msorry i stopped ye.""look here, friend," said i, "if you have anything important totell us, out with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, youare mistaken in your game; that's all i have to say.""and it's said very well, and i like to hear a chap talk up thatway; you are just the man for him_the likes of ye. morning to ye,shipmates, morning! oh! when ye get there, tell _em i've concludednot to make one of _em.""ah, my dear fellow, you can't fool us that way_you can't foolus. it is the easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he hada great secret in him.""morning to ye, shipmates, morning.""morning it is," said i. "come along, queequeg, let's leave thiscrazy man. but stop, tell me your name, will you?""elijah."elijah! thought i, and we walked away, both commenting, after eachother's fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that hewas nothing but a humbug, trying to be a bugbear. but we had not goneperhaps above a hundred yards, when chancing to turn a corner, andlooking back as i did so, who should be seen but elijah following us,though at a distance. somehow, the sight of him struck me so, that isaid nothing to queequeg of his being behind, but passed on with mycomrade, anxious to see whether the stranger would turn the same cornerthat we did. he did; and then it seemed to me that he was doggingus, but with what intent i could not for the life of me imagine. thiscircumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-revealing,shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague wondermentsand half-apprehensions, and all connected with the pequod; and captainahab; and the leg he had lost; and the cape horn fit; and the silvercalabash; and what captain peleg had said of him, when i left the shipthe day previous; and the prediction of the squaw tistig; and the voyagewe had bound ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.i was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged elijah was reallydogging us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with queequeg,and on that side of it retraced our steps. but elijah passed on, withoutseeming to notice us. this relieved me; and once more, and finally as itseemed to me, i pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.chapter 20. all astir.a day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the pequod.not only were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming onboard, and bolts of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everythingbetokened that the ship's preparations were hurrying to a close.captain peleg seldom or never went ashore, but sat in his wigwam keepinga sharp look-out upon the hands: bildad did all the purchasing andproviding at the stores; and the men employed in the hold and on therigging were working till long after night-fall.on the day following queequeg's signing the articles, word was givenat all the inns where the ship's company were stopping, that theirchests must be on board before night, for there was no telling howsoon the vessel might be sailing. so queequeg and i got down our traps,resolving, however, to sleep ashore till the last. but it seems theyalways give very long notice in these cases, and the ship did not sailfor several days. but no wonder; there was a good deal to be done, andthere is no telling how many things to be thought of, before the pequodwas fully equipped.every one knows what a multitude of things_beds, sauce-pans, knivesand forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, areindispensable to the business of housekeeping. just so with whaling,which necessitates a three-years' housekeeping upon the wide ocean,far from all grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. andthough this also holds true of merchant vessels, yet not by any meansto the same extent as with whalemen. for besides the great length of thewhaling voyage, the numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution of thefishery, and the impossibility of replacing them at the remote harborsusually frequented, it must be remembered, that of all ships, whalingvessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and especiallyto the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the success ofthe voyage most depends. hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and sparelines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but a spare captainand duplicate ship.at the period of our arrival at the island, the heaviest storage of thepequod had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water,fuel, and iron hoops and staves. but, as before hinted, for some timethere was a continual fetching and carrying on board of divers odds andends of things, both large and small.chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was captainbildad's sister, a lean old lady of a most determined andindefatigable spirit, but withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolvedthat, if she could help it, nothing should be found wanting in thepequod, after once fairly getting to sea. at one time she would comeon board with a jar of pickles for the steward's pantry; another timewith a bunch of quills for the chief mate's desk, where he kept hislog; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small of some one'srheumatic back. never did any woman better deserve her name, which wascharity_aunt charity, as everybody called her. and like a sisterof charity did this charitable aunt charity bustle about hither andthither, ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised toyield safety, comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in whichher beloved brother bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owneda score or two of well-saved dollars.but it was startling to see this excellent hearted quakeress coming onboard, as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, anda still longer whaling lance in the other. nor was bildad himself norcaptain peleg at all backward. as for bildad, he carried about with hima long list of the articles needed, and at every fresh arrival, downwent his mark opposite that article upon the paper. every once in awhile peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den, roaring at the mendown the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the mast-head, and thenconcluded by roaring back into his wigwam.during these days of preparation, queequeg and i often visited thecraft, and as often i asked about captain ahab, and how he was, and whenhe was going to come on board his ship. to these questions they wouldanswer, that he was getting better and better, and was expected aboardevery day; meantime, the two captains, peleg and bildad, could attendto everything necessary to fit the vessel for the voyage. if i had beendownright honest with myself, i would have seen very plainly in my heartthat i did but half fancy being committed this way to so long a voyage,without once laying my eyes on the man who was to be the absolutedictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the open sea.but when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he bealready involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up hissuspicions even from himself. and much this way it was with me. i saidnothing, and tried to think nothing.at last it was given out that some time next day the ship wouldcertainly sail. so next morning, queequeg and i took a very early start.chapter 21. going aboard.it was nearly six o'clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when wedrew nigh the wharf."there are some sailors running ahead there, if i see right," said ito queequeg, "it can't be shadows; she's off by sunrise, i guess;come on!""avast!" cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming closebehind us, laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuatinghimself between us, stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertaintwilight, strangely peering from queequeg to me. it was elijah."going aboard?""hands off, will you," said i."lookee here," said queequeg, shaking himself, "go _way!""ain't going aboard, then?""yes, we are," said i, "but what business is that of yours? do youknow, mr. elijah, that i consider you a little impertinent?""no, no, no; i wasn't aware of that," said elijah, slowly andwonderingly looking from me to queequeg, with the most unaccountableglances."elijah," said i, "you will oblige my friend and me bywithdrawing. we are going to the indian and pacific oceans, and wouldprefer not to be detained.""ye be, be ye? coming back afore breakfast?""he's cracked, queequeg," said i, "come on.""holloa!" cried stationary elijah, hailing us when we had removed afew paces."never mind him," said i, "queequeg, come on."but he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on myshoulder, said_"did ye see anything looking like men going towardsthat ship a while ago?"struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, i answered, saying,"yes, i thought i did see four or five men; but it was too dim to besure.""very dim, very dim," said elijah. "morning to ye."once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; andtouching my shoulder again, said, "see if you can find _em now, willye?"find who?""morning to ye! morning to ye!" he rejoined, again movingoff. "oh! i was going to warn ye against_but never mind, nevermind_it's all one, all in the family too;_sharp frost thismorning, ain't it? good-bye to ye. shan't see ye again very soon,i guess; unless it's before the grand jury." and with these crackedwords he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no smallwonderment at his frantic impudence.at last, stepping on board the pequod, we found everything in profoundquiet, not a soul moving. the cabin entrance was locked within; thehatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. going forwardto the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle open. seeing alight, we went down, and found only an old rigger there, wrapped in atattered pea-jacket. he was thrown at whole length upon two chests, hisface downwards and inclosed in his folded arms. the profoundest slumberslept upon him."those sailors we saw, queequeg, where can they have gone to?" saidi, looking dubiously at the sleeper. but it seemed that, when on thewharf, queequeg had not at all noticed what i now alluded to; hencei would have thought myself to have been optically deceived in thatmatter, were it not for elijah's otherwise inexplicable question. buti beat the thing down; and again marking the sleeper, jocularly hintedto queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with the body; telling himto establish himself accordingly. he put his hand upon the sleeper'srear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without moreado, sat quietly down there."gracious! queequeg, don't sit there," said i."oh! perry dood seat," said queequeg, "my country way; won'thurt him face.""face!" said i, "call that his face? very benevolent countenancethen; but how hard he breathes, he's heaving himself; get off,queequeg, you are heavy, it's grinding the face of the poor. getoff, queequeg! look, he'll twitch you off soon. i wonder he don'twake."queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, andlighted his tomahawk pipe. i sat at the feet. we kept the pipe passingover the sleeper, from one to the other. meanwhile, upon questioning himin his broken fashion, queequeg gave me to understand that, in hisland, owing to the absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king,chiefs, and great people generally, were in the custom of fattening someof the lower orders for ottomans; and to furnish a house comfortably inthat respect, you had only to buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, and laythem round in the piers and alcoves. besides, it was very convenient onan excursion; much better than those garden-chairs which are convertibleinto walking-sticks; upon occasion, a chief calling his attendant, anddesiring him to make a settee of himself under a spreading tree, perhapsin some damp marshy place.while narrating these things, every time queequeg received the tomahawkfrom me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper's head."what's that for, queequeg?""perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!"he was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe,which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothedhis soul, when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. thestrong vapour now completely filling the contracted hole, it beganto tell upon him. he breathed with a sort of muffledness; then seemedtroubled in the nose; then revolved over once or twice; then sat up andrubbed his eyes."holloa!" he breathed at last, "who be ye smokers?""shipped men," answered i, "when does she sail?""aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? she sails to-day. the captaincame aboard last night.""what captain?_ahab?""who but him indeed?"i was going to ask him some further questions concerning ahab, when weheard a noise on deck."holloa! starbuck's astir," said the rigger. "he's a livelychief mate, that; good man, and a pious; but all alive now, i must turnto." and so saying he went on deck, and we followed.it was now clear sunrise. soon the crew came on board in twos andthrees; the riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were activelyengaged; and several of the shore people were busy in bringing variouslast things on board. meanwhile captain ahab remained invisiblyenshrined within his cabin.chapter 22. merry christmas.at length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship'sriggers, and after the pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, andafter the ever-thoughtful charity had come off in a whale-boat, with herlast gift_a night-cap for stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law,and a spare bible for the steward_after all this, the two captains,peleg and bildad, issued from the cabin, and turning to the chief mate,peleg said:"now, mr. starbuck, are you sure everything is right? captain ahab isall ready_just spoke to him_nothing more to be got from shore, eh?well, call all hands, then. muster _em aft here_blast _em!""no need of profane words, however great the hurry, peleg," saidbildad, "but away with thee, friend starbuck, and do our bidding."how now! here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, captainpeleg and captain bildad were going it with a high hand on thequarter-deck, just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, aswell as to all appearances in port. and, as for captain ahab, no sign ofhim was yet to be seen; only, they said he was in the cabin. but then,the idea was, that his presence was by no means necessary in getting theship under weigh, and steering her well out to sea. indeed, as that wasnot at all his proper business, but the pilot's; and as he was notyet completely recovered_so they said_therefore, captain ahab stayedbelow. and all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the merchantservice many captains never show themselves on deck for a considerabletime after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the cabin table,having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends, before theyquit the ship for good with the pilot.but there was not much chance to think over the matter, for captainpeleg was now all alive. he seemed to do most of the talking andcommanding, and not bildad."aft here, ye sons of bachelors," he cried, as the sailors lingeredat the main-mast. "mr. starbuck, drive'em aft.""strike the tent there!"_was the next order. as i hinted before,this whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on boardthe pequod, for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was wellknown to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor."man the capstan! blood and thunder!_jump!"_was the nextcommand, and the crew sprang for the handspikes.now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilotis the forward part of the ship. and here bildad, who, with peleg, be itknown, in addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed pilotsof the port_he being suspected to have got himself made a pilot inorder to save the nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concernedin, for he never piloted any other craft_bildad, i say, might nowbe seen actively engaged in looking over the bows for the approachinganchor, and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave of psalmody,to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared forth some sort ofa chorus about the girls in booble alley, with hearty good will.nevertheless, not three days previous, bildad had told them that noprofane songs would be allowed on board the pequod, particularly ingetting under weigh; and charity, his sister, had placed a small choicecopy of watts in each seaman's berth.meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, captain peleg rippedand swore astern in the most frightful manner. i almost thought he wouldsink the ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily i pausedon my handspike, and told queequeg to do the same, thinking of theperils we both ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for apilot. i was comforting myself, however, with the thought that in piousbildad might be found some salvation, spite of his seven hundred andseventy-seventh lay; when i felt a sudden sharp poke in my rear, andturning round, was horrified at the apparition of captain peleg in theact of withdrawing his leg from my immediate vicinity. that was my firstkick."is that the way they heave in the marchant service?" he roared."spring, thou sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! why don'tye spring, i say, all of ye_spring! quohog! spring, thou chap withthe red whiskers; spring there, scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants.spring, i say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!" and so saying,he moved along the windlass, here and there using his leg very freely,while imperturbable bildad kept leading off with his psalmody. thinks i,captain peleg must have been drinking something to-day.at last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. itwas a short, cold christmas; and as the short northern day merged intonight, we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whosefreezing spray cased us in ice, as in polished armor. the long rows ofteeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight; and like the whiteivory tusks of some huge elephant, vast curving icicles depended fromthe bows.lank bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as theold craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering frostall over her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his steadynotes were heard,_"sweet fields beyond the swelling flood, stand dressed in livinggreen. so to the jews old canaan stood, while jordan rolled between."never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then. theywere full of hope and fruition. spite of this frigid winter night in theboisterous atlantic, spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket, there wasyet, it then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in store; and meadsand glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot up by the spring,untrodden, unwilted, remains at midsummer.at last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots were neededno longer. the stout sail-boat that had accompanied us began rangingalongside.it was curious and not unpleasing, how peleg and bildad were affected atthis juncture, especially captain bildad. for loath to depart, yet;very loath to leave, for good, a ship bound on so long and perilous avoyage_beyond both stormy capes; a ship in which some thousands ofhis hard earned dollars were invested; a ship, in which an old shipmatesailed as captain; a man almost as old as he, once more starting toencounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw; loath to say good-bye toa thing so every way brimful of every interest to him,_poor old bildadlingered long; paced the deck with anxious strides; ran down into thecabin to speak another farewell word there; again came on deck, andlooked to windward; looked towards the wide and endless waters, onlybounded by the far-off unseen eastern continents; looked towardsthe land; looked aloft; looked right and left; looked everywhereand nowhere; and at last, mechanically coiling a rope upon its pin,convulsively grasped stout peleg by the hand, and holding up a lantern,for a moment stood gazing heroically in his face, as much as to say,"nevertheless, friend peleg, i can stand it; yes, i can."as for peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher; but for allhis philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in his eye, when thelantern came too near. and he, too, did not a little run from cabin todeck_now a word below, and now a word with starbuck, the chief mate.but, at last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort of look abouthim,_"captain bildad_come, old shipmate, we must go. back themain-yard there! boat ahoy! stand by to come close alongside, now!careful, careful!_come, bildad, boy_say your last. luck to ye,starbuck_luck to ye, mr. stubb_luck to ye, mr. flask_good-bye andgood luck to ye all_and this day three years i'll have a hot suppersmoking for ye in old nantucket. hurrah and away!""god bless ye, and have ye in his holy keeping, men," murmured oldbildad, almost incoherently. "i hope ye'll have fine weather now, sothat captain ahab may soon be moving among ye_a pleasant sun is allhe needs, and ye'll have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go.be careful in the hunt, ye mates. don't stave the boats needlessly,ye harpooneers; good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent.within the year. don't forget your prayers, either. mr. starbuck, mindthat cooper don't waste the spare staves. oh! the sail-needles are inthe green locker! don't whale it too much a' lord's days, men; butdon't miss a fair chance either, that's rejecting heaven's goodgifts. have an eye to the molasses tierce, mr. stubb; it was a littleleaky, i thought. if ye touch at the islands, mr. flask, beware offornication. good-bye, good-bye! don't keep that cheese too longdown in the hold, mr. starbuck; it'll spoil. be careful with thebutter_twenty cents the pound it was, and mind ye, if_""come, come, captain bildad; stop palavering,_away!" and withthat, peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropt into the boat.ship and boat diverged; the cold, damp night breeze blew between; ascreaming gull flew overhead; the two hulls wildly rolled; we gavethree heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate into the loneatlantic.chapter 23. the lee shore.some chapters back, one bulkington was spoken of, a tall, newlandedmariner, encountered in new bedford at the inn.when on that shivering winter's night, the pequod thrust hervindictive bows into the cold malicious waves, who should i seestanding at her helm but bulkington! i looked with sympathetic awe andfearfulness upon the man, who in mid-winter just landed from a fouryears' dangerous voyage, could so unrestingly push off again forstill another tempestuous term. the land seemed scorching to his feet.wonderfullest things are ever the unmentionable; deep memories yield noepitaphs; this six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave of bulkington.let me only say that it fared with him as with the storm-tossed ship,that miserably drives along the leeward land. the port would faingive succor; the port is pitiful; in the port is safety, comfort,hearthstone, supper, warm blankets, friends, all that's kind to ourmortalities. but in that gale, the port, the land, is that ship'sdirest jeopardy; she must fly all hospitality; one touch of land, thoughit but graze the keel, would make her shudder through and through.with all her might she crowds all sail off shore; in so doing, fights_gainst the very winds that fain would blow her homeward; seeks allthe lashed sea's landlessness again; for refuge's sake forlornlyrushing into peril; her only friend her bitterest foe!know ye now, bulkington? glimpses do ye seem to see of that mortallyintolerable truth; that all deep, earnest thinking is but the intrepideffort of the soul to keep the open independence of her sea; whilethe wildest winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her on thetreacherous, slavish shore?but as in landlessness alone resides highest truth, shoreless,indefinite as god_so, better is it to perish in that howling infinite,than be ingloriously dashed upon the lee, even if that were safety!for worm-like, then, oh! who would craven crawl to land! terrors ofthe terrible! is all this agony so vain? take heart, take heart,o bulkington! bear thee grimly, demigod! up from the spray of thyocean-perishing_straight up, leaps thy apotheosis!chapter 24. the advocate.as queequeg and i are now fairly embarked in this business of whaling;and as this business of whaling has somehow come to be regarded amonglandsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputable pursuit; therefore, iam all anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, of the injustice hereby doneto us hunters of whales.in the first place, it may be deemed almost superfluous to establishthe fact, that among people at large, the business of whaling is notaccounted on a level with what are called the liberal professions. if astranger were introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitan society,it would but slightly advance the general opinion of his merits, werehe presented to the company as a harpooneer, say; and if in emulationof the naval officers he should append the initials s.w.f. (spermwhale fishery) to his visiting card, such a procedure would be deemedpre-eminently presuming and ridiculous.doubtless one leading reason why the world declines honouring uswhalemen, is this: they think that, at best, our vocation amounts to abutchering sort of business; and that when actively engaged therein, weare surrounded by all manner of defilements. butchers we are, that istrue. but butchers, also, and butchers of the bloodiest badge have beenall martial commanders whom the world invariably delights to honour. andas for the matter of the alleged uncleanliness of our business, ye shallsoon be initiated into certain facts hitherto pretty generally unknown,and which, upon the whole, will triumphantly plant the sperm whale-shipat least among the cleanliest things of this tidy earth. but evengranting the charge in question to be true; what disordered slipperydecks of a whale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable carrion ofthose battle-fields from which so many soldiers return to drink inall ladies' plaudits? and if the idea of peril so much enhances thepopular conceit of the soldier's profession; let me assure ye thatmany a veteran who has freely marched up to a battery, would quicklyrecoil at the apparition of the sperm whale's vast tail, fanning intoeddies the air over his head. for what are the comprehensible terrors ofman compared with the interlinked terrors and wonders of god!but, though the world scouts at us whale hunters, yet does itunwittingly pay us the profoundest homage; yea, an all-aboundingadoration! for almost all the tapers, lamps, and candles that burn roundthe globe, burn, as before so many shrines, to our glory!but look at this matter in other lights; weigh it in all sorts ofscales; see what we whalemen are, and have been.why did the dutch in de witt's time have admirals of their whalingfleets? why did louis xvi. of france, at his own personal expense, fitout whaling ships from dunkirk, and politely invite to that town somescore or two of families from our own island of nantucket? why didbritain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her whalemen in bountiesupwards of l1,000,000? and lastly, how comes it that we whalemen ofamerica now outnumber all the rest of the banded whalemen in the world;sail a navy of upwards of seven hundred vessels; manned by eighteenthousand men; yearly consuming 4,000,000 of dollars; the ships worth,at the time of sailing, _20,000,000! and every year importing into ourharbors a well reaped harvest of _7,000,000. how comes all this, ifthere be not something puissant in whaling?but this is not the half; look again.i freely assert, that the cosmopolite philosopher cannot, for his life,point out one single peaceful influence, which within the last sixtyyears has operated more potentially upon the whole broad world, taken inone aggregate, than the high and mighty business of whaling. one wayand another, it has begotten events so remarkable in themselves, and socontinuously momentous in their sequential issues, that whaling maywell be regarded as that egyptian mother, who bore offspring themselvespregnant from her womb. it would be a hopeless, endless task tocatalogue all these things. let a handful suffice. for many years pastthe whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferreting out the remotest andleast known parts of the earth. she has explored seas and archipelagoeswhich had no chart, where no cook or vancouver had ever sailed. ifamerican and european men-of-war now peacefully ride in once savageharbors, let them fire salutes to the honour and glory of thewhale-ship, which originally showed them the way, and first interpretedbetween them and the savages. they may celebrate as they will the heroesof exploring expeditions, your cooks, your krusensterns; but i say thatscores of anonymous captains have sailed out of nantucket, that wereas great, and greater than your cook and your krusenstern. for in theirsuccourless empty-handedness, they, in the heathenish sharked waters,and by the beaches of unrecorded, javelin islands, battled with virginwonders and terrors that cook with all his marines and muskets wouldnot willingly have dared. all that is made such a flourish of in the oldsouth sea voyages, those things were but the life-time commonplaces ofour heroic nantucketers. often, adventures which vancouver dedicatesthree chapters to, these men accounted unworthy of being set down in theship's common log. ah, the world! oh, the world!until the whale fishery rounded cape horn, no commerce but colonial,scarcely any intercourse but colonial, was carried on between europe andthe long line of the opulent spanish provinces on the pacific coast.it was the whaleman who first broke through the jealous policy of thespanish crown, touching those colonies; and, if space permitted, itmight be distinctly shown how from those whalemen at last eventuated theliberation of peru, chili, and bolivia from the yoke of old spain, andthe establishment of the eternal democracy in those parts.that great america on the other side of the sphere, australia, was givento the enlightened world by the whaleman. after its first blunder-borndiscovery by a dutchman, all other ships long shunned those shoresas pestiferously barbarous; but the whale-ship touched there. thewhale-ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony. moreover,in the infancy of the first australian settlement, the emigrants wereseveral times saved from starvation by the benevolent biscuit of thewhale-ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters. the uncountedisles of all polynesia confess the same truth, and do commercial homageto the whale-ship, that cleared the way for the missionary and themerchant, and in many cases carried the primitive missionaries to theirfirst destinations. if that double-bolted land, japan, is ever to becomehospitable, it is the whale-ship alone to whom the credit will be due;for already she is on the threshold.but if, in the face of all this, you still declare that whaling has noaesthetically noble associations connected with it, then am i ready toshiver fifty lances with you there, and unhorse you with a split helmetevery time.the whale has no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler, youwill say.the whale no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler? who wrotethe first account of our leviathan? who but mighty job! and who composedthe first narrative of a whaling-voyage? who, but no less a prince thanalfred the great, who, with his own royal pen, took down the words fromother, the norwegian whale-hunter of those times! and who pronounced ourglowing eulogy in parliament? who, but edmund burke!true enough, but then whalemen themselves are poor devils; they have nogood blood in their veins.no good blood in their veins? they have something better than royalblood there. the grandmother of benjamin franklin was mary morrel;afterwards, by marriage, mary folger, one of the old settlersof nantucket, and the ancestress to a long line of folgers andharpooneers_all kith and kin to noble benjamin_this day darting thebarbed iron from one side of the world to the other.good again; but then all confess that somehow whaling is notrespectable.whaling not respectable? whaling is imperial! by old english statutorylaw, the whale is declared "a royal fish." *oh, that's only nominal! the whale himself has never figured in anygrand imposing way.the whale never figured in any grand imposing way? in one of the mightytriumphs given to a roman general upon his entering the world'scapital, the bones of a whale, brought all the way from the syriancoast, were the most conspicuous object in the cymballed procession.**see subsequent chapters for something more on this head.grant it, since you cite it; but, say what you will, there is no realdignity in whaling.no dignity in whaling? the dignity of our calling the very heavensattest. cetus is a constellation in the south! no more! drive down yourhat in presence of the czar, and take it off to queequeg! no more! iknow a man that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundred and fiftywhales. i account that man more honourable than that great captain ofantiquity who boasted of taking as many walled towns.and, as for me, if, by any possibility, there be any as yet undiscoveredprime thing in me; if i shall ever deserve any real repute in that smallbut high hushed world which i might not be unreasonably ambitious of; ifhereafter i shall do anything that, upon the whole, a man might ratherhave done than to have left undone; if, at my death, my executors, ormore properly my creditors, find any precious mss. in my desk, then herei prospectively ascribe all the honour and the glory to whaling; for awhale-ship was my yale college and my harvard.chapter 25. postscript.in behalf of the dignity of whaling, i would fain advance naught butsubstantiated facts. but after embattling his facts, an advocate whoshould wholly suppress a not unreasonable surmise, which mighttell eloquently upon his cause_such an advocate, would he not beblameworthy?it is well known that at the coronation of kings and queens, even modernones, a certain curious process of seasoning them for their functions isgone through. there is a saltcellar of state, so called, and there maybe a castor of state. how they use the salt, precisely_who knows?certain i am, however, that a king's head is solemnly oiled at hiscoronation, even as a head of salad. can it be, though, that theyanoint it with a view of making its interior run well, as they anointmachinery? much might be ruminated here, concerning the essentialdignity of this regal process, because in common life we esteem butmeanly and contemptibly a fellow who anoints his hair, and palpablysmells of that anointing. in truth, a mature man who uses hair-oil,unless medicinally, that man has probably got a quoggy spot in himsomewhere. as a general rule, he can't amount to much in his totality.but the only thing to be considered here, is this_what kind of oil isused at coronations? certainly it cannot be olive oil, nor macassar oil,nor castor oil, nor bear's oil, nor train oil, nor cod-liver oil. whatthen can it possibly be, but sperm oil in its unmanufactured, unpollutedstate, the sweetest of all oils?think of that, ye loyal britons! we whalemen supply your kings andqueens with coronation stuff!chapter 26. knights and squires.the chief mate of the pequod was starbuck, a native of nantucket, and aquaker by descent. he was a long, earnest man, and though born on an icycoast, seemed well adapted to endure hot latitudes, his flesh being hardas twice-baked biscuit. transported to the indies, his live blood wouldnot spoil like bottled ale. he must have been born in some time ofgeneral drought and famine, or upon one of those fast days for whichhis state is famous. only some thirty arid summers had he seen; thosesummers had dried up all his physical superfluousness. but this, histhinness, so to speak, seemed no more the token of wasting anxieties andcares, than it seemed the indication of any bodily blight. it was merelythe condensation of the man. he was by no means ill-looking; quite thecontrary. his pure tight skin was an excellent fit; and closely wrappedup in it, and embalmed with inner health and strength, like a revivifiedegyptian, this starbuck seemed prepared to endure for long ages to come,and to endure always, as now; for be it polar snow or torrid sun, likea patent chronometer, his interior vitality was warranted to do wellin all climates. looking into his eyes, you seemed to see there the yetlingering images of those thousand-fold perils he had calmly confrontedthrough life. a staid, steadfast man, whose life for the most part was atelling pantomime of action, and not a tame chapter of sounds. yet, forall his hardy sobriety and fortitude, there were certain qualitiesin him which at times affected, and in some cases seemed well nigh tooverbalance all the rest. uncommonly conscientious for a seaman, andendued with a deep natural reverence, the wild watery loneliness of hislife did therefore strongly incline him to superstition; but to thatsort of superstition, which in some organizations seems rather tospring, somehow, from intelligence than from ignorance. outward portentsand inward presentiments were his. and if at times these things bent thewelded iron of his soul, much more did his far-away domestic memoriesof his young cape wife and child, tend to bend him still more from theoriginal ruggedness of his nature, and open him still further to thoselatent influences which, in some honest-hearted men, restrain the gushof dare-devil daring, so often evinced by others in the more perilousvicissitudes of the fishery. "i will have no man in my boat," saidstarbuck, "who is not afraid of a whale." by this, he seemed tomean, not only that the most reliable and useful courage was that whicharises from the fair estimation of the encountered peril, but that anutterly fearless man is a far more dangerous comrade than a coward."aye, aye," said stubb, the second mate, "starbuck, there, is ascareful a man as you'll find anywhere in this fishery." but we shallere long see what that word "careful" precisely means when used by aman like stubb, or almost any other whale hunter.starbuck was no crusader after perils; in him courage was not asentiment; but a thing simply useful to him, and always at hand upon allmortally practical occasions. besides, he thought, perhaps, that in thisbusiness of whaling, courage was one of the great staple outfits ofthe ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to be foolishly wasted.wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whales after sun-down; norfor persisting in fighting a fish that too much persisted in fightinghim. for, thought starbuck, i am here in this critical ocean to killwhales for my living, and not to be killed by them for theirs; and thathundreds of men had been so killed starbuck well knew. what doom was hisown father's? where, in the bottomless deeps, could he find the tornlimbs of his brother?with memories like these in him, and, moreover, given to a certainsuperstitiousness, as has been said; the courage of this starbuck whichcould, nevertheless, still flourish, must indeed have been extreme. butit was not in reasonable nature that a man so organized, and with suchterrible experiences and remembrances as he had; it was not in naturethat these things should fail in latently engendering an element inhim, which, under suitable circumstances, would break out from itsconfinement, and burn all his courage up. and brave as he might be, itwas that sort of bravery chiefly, visible in some intrepid men, which,while generally abiding firm in the conflict with seas, or winds, orwhales, or any of the ordinary irrational horrors of the world, yetcannot withstand those more terrific, because more spiritual terrors,which sometimes menace you from the concentrating brow of an enraged andmighty man.but were the coming narrative to reveal in any instance, the completeabasement of poor starbuck's fortitude, scarce might i have the heartto write it; for it is a thing most sorrowful, nay shocking, to exposethe fall of valour in the soul. men may seem detestable as jointstock-companies and nations; knaves, fools, and murderers there may be;men may have mean and meagre faces; but man, in the ideal, is so nobleand so sparkling, such a grand and glowing creature, that over anyignominious blemish in him all his fellows should run to throw theircostliest robes. that immaculate manliness we feel within ourselves,so far within us, that it remains intact though all the outer characterseem gone; bleeds with keenest anguish at the undraped spectacle ofa valor-ruined man. nor can piety itself, at such a shameful sight,completely stifle her upbraidings against the permitting stars. but thisaugust dignity i treat of, is not the dignity of kings and robes, butthat abounding dignity which has no robed investiture. thou shalt see itshining in the arm that wields a pick or drives a spike; that democraticdignity which, on all hands, radiates without end from god; himself! thegreat god absolute! the centre and circumference of all democracy! hisomnipresence, our divine equality!if, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and castaways, i shallhereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark; weave round them tragicgraces; if even the most mournful, perchance the most abased, among themall, shall at times lift himself to the exalted mounts; if i shalltouch that workman's arm with some ethereal light; if i shall spread arainbow over his disastrous set of sun; then against all mortal criticsbear me out in it, thou just spirit of equality, which hast spread oneroyal mantle of humanity over all my kind! bear me out in it, thou greatdemocratic god! who didst not refuse to the swart convict, bunyan, thepale, poetic pearl; thou who didst clothe with doubly hammered leavesof finest gold, the stumped and paupered arm of old cervantes; thou whodidst pick up andrew jackson from the pebbles; who didst hurl him upon awar-horse; who didst thunder him higher than a throne! thou who, in allthy mighty, earthly marchings, ever cullest thy selectest champions fromthe kingly commons; bear me out in it, o god!chapter 27. knights and squires.stubb was the second mate. he was a native of cape cod; and hence,according to local usage, was called a cape-cod-man. a happy-go-lucky;neither craven nor valiant; taking perils as they came with anindifferent air; and while engaged in the most imminent crisis of thechase, toiling away, calm and collected as a journeyman joiner engagedfor the year. good-humored, easy, and careless, he presided over hiswhale-boat as if the most deadly encounter were but a dinner, and hiscrew all invited guests. he was as particular about the comfortablearrangement of his part of the boat, as an old stage-driver is about thesnugness of his box. when close to the whale, in the very death-lock ofthe fight, he handled his unpitying lance coolly and off-handedly, asa whistling tinker his hammer. he would hum over his old rigadig tuneswhile flank and flank with the most exasperated monster. long usage had,for this stubb, converted the jaws of death into an easy chair. what hethought of death itself, there is no telling. whether he ever thought ofit at all, might be a question; but, if he ever did chance to cast hismind that way after a comfortable dinner, no doubt, like a good sailor,he took it to be a sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft, and bestirthemselves there, about something which he would find out when he obeyedthe order, and not sooner.what, perhaps, with other things, made stubb such an easy-going,unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off with the burden of life in aworld full of grave pedlars, all bowed to the ground with their packs;what helped to bring about that almost impious good-humor of his; thatthing must have been his pipe. for, like his nose, his short, blacklittle pipe was one of the regular features of his face. you wouldalmost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunk without hisnose as without his pipe. he kept a whole row of pipes there readyloaded, stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand; and, whenever heturned in, he smoked them all out in succession, lighting one fromthe other to the end of the chapter; then loading them again to be inreadiness anew. for, when stubb dressed, instead of first putting hislegs into his trowsers, he put his pipe into his mouth.i say this continual smoking must have been one cause, at least, of hispeculiar disposition; for every one knows that this earthly air, whetherashore or afloat, is terribly infected with the nameless miseries ofthe numberless mortals who have died exhaling it; and as in time of thecholera, some people go about with a camphorated handkerchief to theirmouths; so, likewise, against all mortal tribulations, stubb's tobaccosmoke might have operated as a sort of disinfecting agent.the third mate was flask, a native of tisbury, in martha's vineyard. ashort, stout, ruddy young fellow, very pugnacious concerning whales,who somehow seemed to think that the great leviathans had personallyand hereditarily affronted him; and therefore it was a sort of point ofhonour with him, to destroy them whenever encountered. so utterly lostwas he to all sense of reverence for the many marvels of their majesticbulk and mystic ways; and so dead to anything like an apprehension ofany possible danger from encountering them; that in his poor opinion,the wondrous whale was but a species of magnified mouse, or at leastwater-rat, requiring only a little circumvention and some smallapplication of time and trouble in order to kill and boil. thisignorant, unconscious fearlessness of his made him a little waggish inthe matter of whales; he followed these fish for the fun of it; and athree years' voyage round cape horn was only a jolly joke that lastedthat length of time. as a carpenter's nails are divided into wroughtnails and cut nails; so mankind may be similarly divided. little flaskwas one of the wrought ones; made to clinch tight and last long. theycalled him king-post on board of the pequod; because, in form, he couldbe well likened to the short, square timber known by that name in arcticwhalers; and which by the means of many radiating side timbers insertedinto it, serves to brace the ship against the icy concussions of thosebattering seas.now these three mates_starbuck, stubb, and flask, were momentousmen. they it was who by universal prescription commanded three of thepequod's boats as headsmen. in that grand order of battle in whichcaptain ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on the whales,these three headsmen were as captains of companies. or, being armed withtheir long keen whaling spears, they were as a picked trio of lancers;even as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins.and since in this famous fishery, each mate or headsman, like a gothicknight of old, is always accompanied by his boat-steerer or harpooneer,who in certain conjunctures provides him with a fresh lance, whenthe former one has been badly twisted, or elbowed in the assault; andmoreover, as there generally subsists between the two, a close intimacyand friendliness; it is therefore but meet, that in this place we setdown who the pequod's harpooneers were, and to what headsman each ofthem belonged.first of all was queequeg, whom starbuck, the chief mate, had selectedfor his squire. but queequeg is already known.next was tashtego, an unmixed indian from gay head, the most westerlypromontory of martha's vineyard, where there still exists the lastremnant of a village of red men, which has long supplied the neighboringisland of nantucket with many of her most daring harpooneers. inthe fishery, they usually go by the generic name of gay-headers.tashtego's long, lean, sable hair, his high cheek bones, and blackrounding eyes_for an indian, oriental in their largeness, butantarctic in their glittering expression_all this sufficientlyproclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those proudwarrior hunters, who, in quest of the great new england moose, hadscoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the main. but no longersnuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the woodland, tashtego nowhunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea; the unerring harpoonof the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow of the sires. to look atthe tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs, you would almost have creditedthe superstitions of some of the earlier puritans, and half-believedthis wild indian to be a son of the prince of the powers of the air.tashtego was stubb the second mate's squire.third among the harpooneers was daggoo, a gigantic, coal-blacknegro-savage, with a lion-like tread_an ahasuerus to behold. suspendedfrom his ears were two golden hoops, so large that the sailors calledthem ring-bolts, and would talk of securing the top-sail halyards tothem. in his youth daggoo had voluntarily shipped on board of a whaler,lying in a lonely bay on his native coast. and never having beenanywhere in the world but in africa, nantucket, and the pagan harborsmost frequented by whalemen; and having now led for many years the boldlife of the fishery in the ships of owners uncommonly heedful of whatmanner of men they shipped; daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues,and erect as a giraffe, moved about the decks in all the pomp of sixfeet five in his socks. there was a corporeal humility in looking up athim; and a white man standing before him seemed a white flag come tobeg truce of a fortress. curious to tell, this imperial negro, ahasuerusdaggoo, was the squire of little flask, who looked like a chess-manbeside him. as for the residue of the pequod's company, be it said,that at the present day not one in two of the many thousand men beforethe mast employed in the american whale fishery, are americans born,though pretty nearly all the officers are. herein it is the same withthe american whale fishery as with the american army and military andmerchant navies, and the engineering forces employed in the constructionof the american canals and railroads. the same, i say, because in allthese cases the native american liberally provides the brains, the restof the world as generously supplying the muscles. no small number ofthese whaling seamen belong to the azores, where the outward boundnantucket whalers frequently touch to augment their crews from the hardypeasants of those rocky shores. in like manner, the greenland whalerssailing out of hull or london, put in at the shetland islands, toreceive the full complement of their crew. upon the passage homewards,they drop them there again. how it is, there is no telling, butislanders seem to make the best whalemen. they were nearly all islandersin the pequod, isolatoes too, i call such, not acknowledging the commoncontinent of men, but each isolato living on a separate continent of hisown. yet now, federated along one keel, what a set these isolatoes were!an anacharsis clootz deputation from all the isles of the sea, and allthe ends of the earth, accompanying old ahab in the pequod to lay theworld's grievances before that bar from which not very many of themever come back. black little pip_he never did_oh, no! he wentbefore. poor alabama boy! on the grim pequod's forecastle, ye shallere long see him, beating his tambourine; prelusive of the eternal time,when sent for, to the great quarter-deck on high, he was bid strike inwith angels, and beat his tambourine in glory; called a coward here,hailed a hero there!chapter 28. ahab.for several days after leaving nantucket, nothing above hatches was seenof captain ahab. the mates regularly relieved each other at the watches,and for aught that could be seen to the contrary, they seemed to be theonly commanders of the ship; only they sometimes issued from the cabinwith orders so sudden and peremptory, that after all it was plain theybut commanded vicariously. yes, their supreme lord and dictator wasthere, though hitherto unseen by any eyes not permitted to penetrateinto the now sacred retreat of the cabin.every time i ascended to the deck from my watches below, i instantlygazed aft to mark if any strange face were visible; for my first vaguedisquietude touching the unknown captain, now in the seclusion of thesea, became almost a perturbation. this was strangely heightened attimes by the ragged elijah's diabolical incoherences uninvitedlyrecurring to me, with a subtle energy i could not have before conceivedof. but poorly could i withstand them, much as in other moods i wasalmost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalities of that outlandishprophet of the wharves. but whatever it was of apprehensiveness oruneasiness_to call it so_which i felt, yet whenever i came to lookabout me in the ship, it seemed against all warrantry to cherish suchemotions. for though the harpooneers, with the great body of the crew,were a far more barbaric, heathenish, and motley set than any of thetame merchant-ship companies which my previous experiences had made meacquainted with, still i ascribed this_and rightly ascribed it_tothe fierce uniqueness of the very nature of that wild scandinavianvocation in which i had so abandonedly embarked. but it was especiallythe aspect of the three chief officers of the ship, the mates, whichwas most forcibly calculated to allay these colourless misgivings, andinduce confidence and cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage.three better, more likely sea-officers and men, each in his owndifferent way, could not readily be found, and they were every one ofthem americans; a nantucketer, a vineyarder, a cape man. now, it beingchristmas when the ship shot from out her harbor, for a space we hadbiting polar weather, though all the time running away from it to thesouthward; and by every degree and minute of latitude which we sailed,gradually leaving that merciless winter, and all its intolerable weatherbehind us. it was one of those less lowering, but still grey and gloomyenough mornings of the transition, when with a fair wind the shipwas rushing through the water with a vindictive sort of leaping andmelancholy rapidity, that as i mounted to the deck at the call of theforenoon watch, so soon as i levelled my glance towards the taffrail,foreboding shivers ran over me. reality outran apprehension; captainahab stood upon his quarter-deck.there seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him, nor of therecovery from any. he looked like a man cut away from the stake, whenthe fire has overrunningly wasted all the limbs without consuming them,or taking away one particle from their compacted aged robustness. hiswhole high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze, and shaped in anunalterable mould, like cellini's cast perseus. threading its way outfrom among his grey hairs, and continuing right down one side of histawny scorched face and neck, till it disappeared in his clothing,you saw a slender rod-like mark, lividly whitish. it resembled thatperpendicular seam sometimes made in the straight, lofty trunk ofa great tree, when the upper lightning tearingly darts down it, andwithout wrenching a single twig, peels and grooves out the bark from topto bottom, ere running off into the soil, leaving the tree still greenlyalive, but branded. whether that mark was born with him, or whether itwas the scar left by some desperate wound, no one could certainly say.by some tacit consent, throughout the voyage little or no allusion wasmade to it, especially by the mates. but once tashtego's senior, anold gay-head indian among the crew, superstitiously asserted that nottill he was full forty years old did ahab become that way branded, andthen it came upon him, not in the fury of any mortal fray, but inan elemental strife at sea. yet, this wild hint seemed inferentiallynegatived, by what a grey manxman insinuated, an old sepulchral man,who, having never before sailed out of nantucket, had never ere thislaid eye upon wild ahab. nevertheless, the old sea-traditions, theimmemorial credulities, popularly invested this old manxman withpreternatural powers of discernment. so that no white sailor seriouslycontradicted him when he said that if ever captain ahab shouldbe tranquilly laid out_which might hardly come to pass, so hemuttered_then, whoever should do that last office for the dead, wouldfind a birth-mark on him from crown to sole.so powerfully did the whole grim aspect of ahab affect me, and the lividbrand which streaked it, that for the first few moments i hardly notedthat not a little of this overbearing grimness was owing to the barbaricwhite leg upon which he partly stood. it had previously come to me thatthis ivory leg had at sea been fashioned from the polished bone of thesperm whale's jaw. "aye, he was dismasted off japan," said theold gay-head indian once; "but like his dismasted craft, he shippedanother mast without coming home for it. he has a quiver of _em."i was struck with the singular posture he maintained. upon each sideof the pequod's quarter deck, and pretty close to the mizzen shrouds,there was an auger hole, bored about half an inch or so, into the plank.his bone leg steadied in that hole; one arm elevated, and holding bya shroud; captain ahab stood erect, looking straight out beyond theship's ever-pitching prow. there was an infinity of firmest fortitude,a determinate, unsurrenderable wilfulness, in the fixed and fearless,forward dedication of that glance. not a word he spoke; nor did hisofficers say aught to him; though by all their minutest gesturesand expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy, if not painful,consciousness of being under a troubled master-eye. and not only that,but moody stricken ahab stood before them with a crucifixion in hisface; in all the nameless regal overbearing dignity of some mighty woe.ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into his cabin.but after that morning, he was every day visible to the crew; eitherstanding in his pivot-hole, or seated upon an ivory stool he had; orheavily walking the deck. as the sky grew less gloomy; indeed, began togrow a little genial, he became still less and less a recluse; asif, when the ship had sailed from home, nothing but the dead wintrybleakness of the sea had then kept him so secluded. and, by and by, itcame to pass, that he was almost continually in the air; but, as yet,for all that he said, or perceptibly did, on the at last sunny deck,he seemed as unnecessary there as another mast. but the pequod wasonly making a passage now; not regularly cruising; nearly all whalingpreparatives needing supervision the mates were fully competent to, sothat there was little or nothing, out of himself, to employ or exciteahab, now; and thus chase away, for that one interval, the clouds thatlayer upon layer were piled upon his brow, as ever all clouds choose theloftiest peaks to pile themselves upon.nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling persuasiveness of thepleasant, holiday weather we came to, seemed gradually to charm him fromhis mood. for, as when the red-cheeked, dancing girls, april and may,trip home to the wintry, misanthropic woods; even the barest, ruggedest,most thunder-cloven old oak will at least send forth some few greensprouts, to welcome such glad-hearted visitants; so ahab did, in theend, a little respond to the playful allurings of that girlish air. morethan once did he put forth the faint blossom of a look, which, in anyother man, would have soon flowered out in a smile.chapter 29. enter ahab; to him, stubb.some days elapsed, and ice and icebergs all astern, the pequod nowwent rolling through the bright quito spring, which, at sea, almostperpetually reigns on the threshold of the eternal august of the tropic.the warmly cool, clear, ringing, perfumed, overflowing, redundant days,were as crystal goblets of persian sherbet, heaped up_flaked up, withrose-water snow. the starred and stately nights seemed haughty dames injewelled velvets, nursing at home in lonely pride, the memory of theirabsent conquering earls, the golden helmeted suns! for sleeping man,_twas hard to choose between such winsome days and such seducingnights. but all the witcheries of that unwaning weather did not merelylend new spells and potencies to the outward world. inward they turnedupon the soul, especially when the still mild hours of eve came on;then, memory shot her crystals as the clear ice most forms of noiselesstwilights. and all these subtle agencies, more and more they wrought onahab's texture.old age is always wakeful; as if, the longer linked with life, the lessman has to do with aught that looks like death. among sea-commanders,the old greybeards will oftenest leave their berths to visit thenight-cloaked deck. it was so with ahab; only that now, of late, heseemed so much to live in the open air, that truly speaking, his visitswere more to the cabin, than from the cabin to the planks. "itfeels like going down into one's tomb,"_he would mutter tohimself_"for an old captain like me to be descending this narrowscuttle, to go to my grave-dug berth."so, almost every twenty-four hours, when the watches of the night wereset, and the band on deck sentinelled the slumbers of the band below;and when if a rope was to be hauled upon the forecastle, the sailorsflung it not rudely down, as by day, but with some cautiousness droptit to its place for fear of disturbing their slumbering shipmates; whenthis sort of steady quietude would begin to prevail, habitually, thesilent steersman would watch the cabin-scuttle; and ere long the old manwould emerge, gripping at the iron banister, to help his crippled way.some considering touch of humanity was in him; for at times like these,he usually abstained from patrolling the quarter-deck; because to hiswearied mates, seeking repose within six inches of his ivory heel, suchwould have been the reverberating crack and din of that bony step, thattheir dreams would have been on the crunching teeth of sharks. but once,the mood was on him too deep for common regardings; and as with heavy,lumber-like pace he was measuring the ship from taffrail to mainmast,stubb, the old second mate, came up from below, with a certainunassured, deprecating humorousness, hinted that if captain ahab waspleased to walk the planks, then, no one could say nay; but there mightbe some way of muffling the noise; hinting something indistinctly andhesitatingly about a globe of tow, and the insertion into it, of theivory heel. ah! stubb, thou didst not know ahab then."am i a cannon-ball, stubb," said ahab, "that thou wouldst wad methat fashion? but go thy ways; i had forgot. below to thy nightly grave;where such as ye sleep between shrouds, to use ye to the filling one atlast._down, dog, and kennel!"starting at the unforseen concluding exclamation of the so suddenlyscornful old man, stubb was speechless a moment; then said excitedly,"i am not used to be spoken to that way, sir; i do but less than halflike it, sir.""avast! gritted ahab between his set teeth, and violently moving away,as if to avoid some passionate temptation."no, sir; not yet," said stubb, emboldened, "i will not tamely becalled a dog, sir.""then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and an ass, andbegone, or i'll clear the world of thee!"as he said this, ahab advanced upon him with such overbearing terrors inhis aspect, that stubb involuntarily retreated."i was never served so before without giving a hard blow for it,"muttered stubb, as he found himself descending the cabin-scuttle."it's very queer. stop, stubb; somehow, now, i don't well knowwhether to go back and strike him, or_what's that?_down here on myknees and pray for him? yes, that was the thought coming up in me; butit would be the first time i ever did pray. it's queer; very queer;and he's queer too; aye, take him fore and aft, he's about thequeerest old man stubb ever sailed with. how he flashed at me!_hiseyes like powder-pans! is he mad? anyway there's something on hismind, as sure as there must be something on a deck when it cracks.he aint in his bed now, either, more than three hours out of thetwenty-four; and he don't sleep then. didn't that dough-boy, thesteward, tell me that of a morning he always finds the old man'shammock clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the sheets down at thefoot, and the coverlid almost tied into knots, and the pillow a sort offrightful hot, as though a baked brick had been on it? a hot old man! iguess he's got what some folks ashore call a conscience; it's a kindof tic-dolly-row they say_worse nor a toothache. well, well; i don'tknow what it is, but the lord keep me from catching it. he's full ofriddles; i wonder what he goes into the after hold for, every night,as dough-boy tells me he suspects; what's that for, i should liketo know? who's made appointments with him in the hold? ain't thatqueer, now? but there's no telling, it's the old game_here goesfor a snooze. damn me, it's worth a fellow's while to be born intothe world, if only to fall right asleep. and now that i think of it,that's about the first thing babies do, and that's a sort of queer,too. damn me, but all things are queer, come to think of _em. butthat's against my principles. think not, is my eleventh commandment;and sleep when you can, is my twelfth_so here goes again. but how'sthat? didn't he call me a dog? blazes! he called me ten times adonkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on top of that! he might as wellhave kicked me, and done with it. maybe he did kick me, and i didn'tobserve it, i was so taken all aback with his brow, somehow. it flashedlike a bleached bone. what the devil's the matter with me? i don'tstand right on my legs. coming afoul of that old man has a sort ofturned me wrong side out. by the lord, i must have been dreaming,though_how? how? how?_but the only way's to stash it; so heregoes to hammock again; and in the morning, i'll see how this plagueyjuggling thinks over by daylight."chapter 30. the pipe.when stubb had departed, ahab stood for a while leaning over thebulwarks; and then, as had been usual with him of late, calling a sailorof the watch, he sent him below for his ivory stool, and also his pipe.lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the stool on theweather side of the deck, he sat and smoked.in old norse times, the thrones of the sea-loving danish kings werefabricated, saith tradition, of the tusks of the narwhale. how could onelook at ahab then, seated on that tripod of bones, without bethinkinghim of the royalty it symbolized? for a khan of the plank, and a king ofthe sea, and a great lord of leviathans was ahab.some moments passed, during which the thick vapour came from his mouthin quick and constant puffs, which blew back again into his face. "hownow," he soliloquized at last, withdrawing the tube, "this smokingno longer soothes. oh, my pipe! hard must it go with me if thy charm begone! here have i been unconsciously toiling, not pleasuring_aye, andignorantly smoking to windward all the while; to windward, and withsuch nervous whiffs, as if, like the dying whale, my final jets were thestrongest and fullest of trouble. what business have i with this pipe?this thing that is meant for sereneness, to send up mild white vapoursamong mild white hairs, not among torn iron-grey locks like mine. i'llsmoke no more_"he tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea. the fire hissed in thewaves; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinking pipemade. with slouched hat, ahab lurchingly paced the planks.chapter 31. queen mab.next morning stubb accosted flask."such a queer dream, king-post, i never had. you know the old man'sivory leg, well i dreamed he kicked me with it; and when i tried to kickback, upon my soul, my little man, i kicked my leg right off! and then,presto! ahab seemed a pyramid, and i, like a blazing fool, kept kickingat it. but what was still more curious, flask_you know how curious alldreams are_through all this rage that i was in, i somehow seemed to bethinking to myself, that after all, it was not much of an insult, thatkick from ahab. _why,' thinks i, _what's the row? it's not areal leg, only a false leg.' and there's a mighty difference betweena living thump and a dead thump. that's what makes a blow from thehand, flask, fifty times more savage to bear than a blow from a cane.the living member_that makes the living insult, my little man. andthinks i to myself all the while, mind, while i was stubbing my sillytoes against that cursed pyramid_so confoundedly contradictory was itall, all the while, i say, i was thinking to myself, _what's his legnow, but a cane_a whalebone cane. yes,' thinks i, _it was only aplayful cudgelling_in fact, only a whaleboning that he gave me_nota base kick. besides,' thinks i, _look at it once; why, the end ofit_the foot part_what a small sort of end it is; whereas, if a broadfooted farmer kicked me, there's a devilish broad insult. but thisinsult is whittled down to a point only.' but now comes the greatestjoke of the dream, flask. while i was battering away at the pyramid, asort of badger-haired old merman, with a hump on his back, takes me bythe shoulders, and slews me round. _what are you _bout?' says he.slid! man, but i was frightened. such a phiz! but, somehow, next momenti was over the fright. _what am i about?' says i at last. _andwhat business is that of yours, i should like to know, mr. humpback? doyou want a kick?' by the lord, flask, i had no sooner said that, thanhe turned round his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot ofseaweed he had for a clout_what do you think, i saw?_why thunderalive, man, his stern was stuck full of marlinspikes, with the pointsout. says i, on second thoughts, _i guess i won't kick you, oldfellow.' _wise stubb,' said he, _wise stubb;' and keptmuttering it all the time, a sort of eating of his own gums like achimney hag. seeing he wasn't going to stop saying over his _wisestubb, wise stubb,' i thought i might as well fall to kicking thepyramid again. but i had only just lifted my foot for it, when he roaredout, _stop that kicking!' _halloa,' says i, _what's thematter now, old fellow?' _look ye here,' says he; _let's arguethe insult. captain ahab kicked ye, didn't he?' _yes, he did,'says i__right here it was.' _very good,' says he__heused his ivory leg, didn't he?' _yes, he did,' says i. _wellthen,' says he, _wise stubb, what have you to complain of? didn'the kick with right good will? it wasn't a common pitch pine leg hekicked with, was it? no, you were kicked by a great man, and with abeautiful ivory leg, stubb. it's an honour; i consider it an honour.listen, wise stubb. in old england the greatest lords think it greatglory to be slapped by a queen, and made garter-knights of; but, be yourboast, stubb, that ye were kicked by old ahab, and made a wise man of.remember what i say; be kicked by him; account his kicks honours; and onno account kick back; for you can't help yourself, wise stubb. don'tyou see that pyramid?' with that, he all of a sudden seemed somehow,in some queer fashion, to swim off into the air. i snored; rolled over;and there i was in my hammock! now, what do you think of that dream,flask?""i don't know; it seems a sort of foolish to me, tho.'""may be; may be. but it's made a wise man of me, flask. d'ye seeahab standing there, sideways looking over the stern? well, the bestthing you can do, flask, is to let the old man alone; never speak tohim, whatever he says. halloa! what's that he shouts? hark!""mast-head, there! look sharp, all of ye! there are whales hereabouts!"if ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!"what do you think of that now, flask? ain't there a small drop ofsomething queer about that, eh? a white whale_did ye mark that, man?look ye_there's something special in the wind. stand by for it,flask. ahab has that that's bloody on his mind. but, mum; he comesthis way."chapter 32. cetology.already we are boldly launched upon the deep; but soon we shall be lostin its unshored, harbourless immensities. ere that come to pass; ere thepequod's weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled hulls ofthe leviathan; at the outset it is but well to attend to a matter almostindispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding of the morespecial leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts which are tofollow.it is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera,that i would now fain put before you. yet is it no easy task. theclassification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is hereessayed. listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid down."no branch of zoology is so much involved as that which is entitledcetology," says captain scoresby, a.d. 1820."it is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter into theinquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groupsand families.... utter confusion exists among the historians of thisanimal" (sperm whale), says surgeon beale, a.d. 1839."unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters.""impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea." "afield strewn with thorns." "all these incomplete indications butserve to torture us naturalists."thus speak of the whale, the great cuvier, and john hunter, and lesson,those lights of zoology and anatomy. nevertheless, though of realknowledge there be little, yet of books there are a plenty; and so insome small degree, with cetology, or the science of whales. many arethe men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen, who have atlarge or in little, written of the whale. run over a few:_the authorsof the bible; aristotle; pliny; aldrovandi; sir thomas browne; gesner;ray; linnaeus; rondeletius; willoughby; green; artedi; sibbald; brisson;marten; lacepede; bonneterre; desmarest; baron cuvier; frederick cuvier;john hunter; owen; scoresby; beale; bennett; j. ross browne; theauthor of miriam coffin; olmstead; and the rev. t. cheever. but to whatultimate generalizing purpose all these have written, the above citedextracts will show.of the names in this list of whale authors, only those following owenever saw living whales; and but one of them was a real professionalharpooneer and whaleman. i mean captain scoresby. on the separatesubject of the greenland or right-whale, he is the best existingauthority. but scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the greatsperm whale, compared with which the greenland whale is almost unworthymentioning. and here be it said, that the greenland whale is an usurperupon the throne of the seas. he is not even by any means the largestof the whales. yet, owing to the long priority of his claims, and theprofound ignorance which, till some seventy years back, invested thethen fabulous or utterly unknown sperm-whale, and which ignorance tothis present day still reigns in all but some few scientific retreatsand whale-ports; this usurpation has been every way complete. referenceto nearly all the leviathanic allusions in the great poets of past days,will satisfy you that the greenland whale, without one rival, was tothem the monarch of the seas. but the time has at last come for a newproclamation. this is charing cross; hear ye! good people all,_thegreenland whale is deposed,_the great sperm whale now reigneth!there are only two books in being which at all pretend to put the livingsperm whale before you, and at the same time, in the remotest degreesucceed in the attempt. those books are beale's and bennett's; bothin their time surgeons to english south-sea whale-ships, and both exactand reliable men. the original matter touching the sperm whale to befound in their volumes is necessarily small; but so far as it goes,it is of excellent quality, though mostly confined to scientificdescription. as yet, however, the sperm whale, scientific or poetic,lives not complete in any literature. far above all other hunted whales,his is an unwritten life.now the various species of whales need some sort of popularcomprehensive classification, if only an easy outline one for thepresent, hereafter to be filled in all its departments by subsequentlaborers. as no better man advances to take this matter in hand, ihereupon offer my own poor endeavors. i promise nothing complete;because any human thing supposed to be complete, must for that veryreason infallibly be faulty. i shall not pretend to a minute anatomicaldescription of the various species, or_in this place at least_tomuch of any description. my object here is simply to project the draughtof a systematization of cetology. i am the architect, not the builder.but it is a ponderous task; no ordinary letter-sorter in the post-officeis equal to it. to grope down into the bottom of the sea after them;to have one's hands among the unspeakable foundations, ribs, and verypelvis of the world; this is a fearful thing. what am i that i shouldessay to hook the nose of this leviathan! the awful tauntings in jobmight well appal me. will he (the leviathan) make a covenant with thee?behold the hope of him is vain! but i have swam through libraries andsailed through oceans; i have had to do with whales with these visiblehands; i am in earnest; and i will try. there are some preliminaries tosettle.first: the uncertain, unsettled condition of this science of cetologyis in the very vestibule attested by the fact, that in some quarters itstill remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish. in his system ofnature, a.d. 1776, linnaeus declares, "i hereby separate the whalesfrom the fish." but of my own knowledge, i know that down to theyear 1850, sharks and shad, alewives and herring, against linnaeus'sexpress edict, were still found dividing the possession of the same seaswith the leviathan.the grounds upon which linnaeus would fain have banished the whales fromthe waters, he states as follows: "on account of their warm bilocularheart, their lungs, their movable eyelids, their hollow ears, penemintrantem feminam mammis lactantem," and finally, "ex lege naturaejure meritoque." i submitted all this to my friends simeon maceyand charley coffin, of nantucket, both messmates of mine in a certainvoyage, and they united in the opinion that the reasons set forth werealtogether insufficient. charley profanely hinted they were humbug.be it known that, waiving all argument, i take the good old fashionedground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy jonah to back me.this fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what internalrespect does the whale differ from other fish. above, linnaeus has givenyou those items. but in brief, they are these: lungs and warm blood;whereas, all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.next: how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so asconspicuously to label him for all time to come? to be short, then, awhale is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail. there you havehim. however contracted, that definition is the result of expandedmeditation. a walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus is not afish, because he is amphibious. but the last term of the definition isstill more cogent, as coupled with the first. almost any one must havenoticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat, but avertical, or up-and-down tail. whereas, among spouting fish the tail,though it may be similarly shaped, invariably assumes a horizontalposition.by the above definition of what a whale is, i do by no means excludefrom the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto identifiedwith the whale by the best informed nantucketers; nor, on the otherhand, link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as alien.*hence, all the smaller, spouting, and horizontal tailed fish must beincluded in this ground-plan of cetology. now, then, come the granddivisions of the entire whale host.*i am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled lamatins anddugongs (pig-fish and sow-fish of the coffins of nantucket) are includedby many naturalists among the whales. but as these pig-fish are a noisy,contemptible set, mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers, and feeding onwet hay, and especially as they do not spout, i deny their credentialsas whales; and have presented them with their passports to quit thekingdom of cetology.first: according to magnitude i divide the whales into three primarybooks (subdivisible into chapters), and these shall comprehend them all,both small and large.i. the folio whale; ii. the octavo whale; iii. the duodecimo whale.as the type of the folio i present the sperm whale; of the octavo, thegrampus; of the duodecimo, the porpoise.folios. among these i here include the following chapters:_i. thesperm whale; ii. the right whale; iii. the fin-back whale; iv. thehump-backed whale; v. the razor-back whale; vi. the sulphur-bottomwhale.book i. (folio), chapter i. (sperm whale)._this whale, among theenglish of old vaguely known as the trumpa whale, and the physeterwhale, and the anvil headed whale, is the present cachalot of thefrench, and the pottsfich of the germans, and the macrocephalus of thelong words. he is, without doubt, the largest inhabitant of the globe;the most formidable of all whales to encounter; the most majestic inaspect; and lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce; he beingthe only creature from which that valuable substance, spermaceti, isobtained. all his peculiarities will, in many other places, be enlargedupon. it is chiefly with his name that i now have to do. philologicallyconsidered, it is absurd. some centuries ago, when the sperm whale wasalmost wholly unknown in his own proper individuality, and when his oilwas only accidentally obtained from the stranded fish; in those daysspermaceti, it would seem, was popularly supposed to be derived from acreature identical with the one then known in england as the greenlandor right whale. it was the idea also, that this same spermaceti was thatquickening humor of the greenland whale which the first syllable ofthe word literally expresses. in those times, also, spermaceti wasexceedingly scarce, not being used for light, but only as an ointmentand medicament. it was only to be had from the druggists as you nowadaysbuy an ounce of rhubarb. when, as i opine, in the course of time, thetrue nature of spermaceti became known, its original name was stillretained by the dealers; no doubt to enhance its value by a notion sostrangely significant of its scarcity. and so the appellation must atlast have come to be bestowed upon the whale from which this spermacetiwas really derived.book i. (folio), chapter ii. (right whale)._in one respect this is themost venerable of the leviathans, being the one first regularly huntedby man. it yields the article commonly known as whalebone or baleen;and the oil specially known as "whale oil," an inferior article incommerce. among the fishermen, he is indiscriminately designated by allthe following titles: the whale; the greenland whale; the black whale;the great whale; the true whale; the right whale. there is a deal ofobscurity concerning the identity of the species thus multitudinouslybaptised. what then is the whale, which i include in the second speciesof my folios? it is the great mysticetus of the english naturalists; thegreenland whale of the english whalemen; the baleine ordinaire of thefrench whalemen; the growlands walfish of the swedes. it is the whalewhich for more than two centuries past has been hunted by the dutch andenglish in the arctic seas; it is the whale which the american fishermenhave long pursued in the indian ocean, on the brazil banks, on thenor' west coast, and various other parts of the world, designated bythem right whale cruising grounds.some pretend to see a difference between the greenland whale of theenglish and the right whale of the americans. but they precisely agreein all their grand features; nor has there yet been presented a singledeterminate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction. it is byendless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive differences, thatsome departments of natural history become so repellingly intricate. theright whale will be elsewhere treated of at some length, with referenceto elucidating the sperm whale.book i. (folio), chapter iii. (fin-back)._under this head i reckona monster which, by the various names of fin-back, tall-spout, andlong-john, has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly the whalewhose distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossing theatlantic, in the new york packet-tracks. in the length he attains, andin his baleen, the fin-back resembles the right whale, but is of a lessportly girth, and a lighter colour, approaching to olive. his great lipspresent a cable-like aspect, formed by the intertwisting, slanting foldsof large wrinkles. his grand distinguishing feature, the fin, from whichhe derives his name, is often a conspicuous object. this fin is somethree or four feet long, growing vertically from the hinder part of theback, of an angular shape, and with a very sharp pointed end. even ifnot the slightest other part of the creature be visible, this isolatedfin will, at times, be seen plainly projecting from the surface. whenthe sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with spherical ripples,and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon the wrinkledsurface, it may well be supposed that the watery circle surrounding itsomewhat resembles a dial, with its style and wavy hour-lines graved onit. on that ahaz-dial the shadow often goes back. the fin-back is notgregarious. he seems a whale-hater, as some men are man-haters. veryshy; always going solitary; unexpectedly rising to the surface in theremotest and most sullen waters; his straight and single lofty jetrising like a tall misanthropic spear upon a barren plain; gifted withsuch wondrous power and velocity in swimming, as to defy all presentpursuit from man; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerablecain of his race, bearing for his mark that style upon his back. fromhaving the baleen in his mouth, the fin-back is sometimes included withthe right whale, among a theoretic species denominated whalebone whales,that is, whales with baleen. of these so called whalebone whales, therewould seem to be several varieties, most of which, however, are littleknown. broad-nosed whales and beaked whales; pike-headed whales; bunchedwhales; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales, are the fishermen'snames for a few sorts.in connection with this appellative of "whalebone whales," it isof great importance to mention, that however such a nomenclature may beconvenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales, yet it isin vain to attempt a clear classification of the leviathan, founded uponeither his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth; notwithstanding that thosemarked parts or features very obviously seem better adapted to affordthe basis for a regular system of cetology than any other detachedbodily distinctions, which the whale, in his kinds, presents. howthen? the baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth; these are things whosepeculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales,without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure in otherand more essential particulars. thus, the sperm whale and the humpbackedwhale, each has a hump; but there the similitude ceases. then, this samehumpbacked whale and the greenland whale, each of these has baleen;but there again the similitude ceases. and it is just the same with theother parts above mentioned. in various sorts of whales, they form suchirregular combinations; or, in the case of any one of them detached,such an irregular isolation; as utterly to defy all generalmethodization formed upon such a basis. on this rock every one of thewhale-naturalists has split.but it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts of thewhale, in his anatomy_there, at least, we shall be able to hit theright classification. nay; what thing, for example, is there in thegreenland whale's anatomy more striking than his baleen? yet we haveseen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify thegreenland whale. and if you descend into the bowels of the variousleviathans, why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth part asavailable to the systematizer as those external ones already enumerated.what then remains? nothing but to take hold of the whales bodily, intheir entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them that way. and this isthe bibliographical system here adopted; and it is the only one that canpossibly succeed, for it alone is practicable. to proceed.book i. (folio) chapter iv. (hump-back)._this whale is often seen onthe northern american coast. he has been frequently captured there, andtowed into harbor. he has a great pack on him like a peddler; or youmight call him the elephant and castle whale. at any rate, the popularname for him does not sufficiently distinguish him, since the spermwhale also has a hump though a smaller one. his oil is not veryvaluable. he has baleen. he is the most gamesome and light-hearted ofall the whales, making more gay foam and white water generally than anyother of them.book i. (folio), chapter v. (razor-back)._of this whale little isknown but his name. i have seen him at a distance off cape horn. ofa retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers. though nocoward, he has never yet shown any part of him but his back, which risesin a long sharp ridge. let him go. i know little more of him, nor doesanybody else.book i. (folio), chapter vi. (sulphur-bottom)._another retiringgentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping along thetartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings. he is seldom seen;at least i have never seen him except in the remoter southern seas,and then always at too great a distance to study his countenance. he isnever chased; he would run away with rope-walks of line. prodigies aretold of him. adieu, sulphur bottom! i can say nothing more that is trueof ye, nor can the oldest nantucketer.thus ends book i. (folio), and now begins book ii. (octavo).octavoes.*_these embrace the whales of middling magnitude, among whichpresent may be numbered:_i., the grampus; ii., the black fish; iii.,the narwhale; iv., the thrasher; v., the killer.*why this book of whales is not denominated the quarto is very plain.because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than those ofthe former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness to themin figure, yet the bookbinder's quarto volume in its dimensioned formdoes not preserve the shape of the folio volume, but the octavo volumedoes.book ii. (octavo), chapter i. (grampus)._though this fish, whoseloud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing, has furnished a proverbto landsmen, is so well known a denizen of the deep, yet is he notpopularly classed among whales. but possessing all the grand distinctivefeatures of the leviathan, most naturalists have recognised him for one.he is of moderate octavo size, varying from fifteen to twenty-five feetin length, and of corresponding dimensions round the waist. he swims inherds; he is never regularly hunted, though his oil is considerable inquantity, and pretty good for light. by some fishermen his approach isregarded as premonitory of the advance of the great sperm whale.book ii. (octavo), chapter ii. (black fish)._i give the popularfishermen's names for all these fish, for generally they are the best.where any name happens to be vague or inexpressive, i shall say so,and suggest another. i do so now, touching the black fish, so-called,because blackness is the rule among almost all whales. so, call him thehyena whale, if you please. his voracity is well known, and from thecircumstance that the inner angles of his lips are curved upwards, hecarries an everlasting mephistophelean grin on his face. this whaleaverages some sixteen or eighteen feet in length. he is found in almostall latitudes. he has a peculiar way of showing his dorsal hooked finin swimming, which looks something like a roman nose. when not moreprofitably employed, the sperm whale hunters sometimes capture the hyenawhale, to keep up the supply of cheap oil for domestic employment_assome frugal housekeepers, in the absence of company, and quite alone bythemselves, burn unsavory tallow instead of odorous wax. though theirblubber is very thin, some of these whales will yield you upwards ofthirty gallons of oil.book ii. (octavo), chapter iii. (narwhale), that is, nostrilwhale._another instance of a curiously named whale, so named i supposefrom his peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peaked nose. thecreature is some sixteen feet in length, while its horn averages fivefeet, though some exceed ten, and even attain to fifteen feet. strictlyspeaking, this horn is but a lengthened tusk, growing out from the jawin a line a little depressed from the horizontal. but it is onlyfound on the sinister side, which has an ill effect, giving its ownersomething analogous to the aspect of a clumsy left-handed man. whatprecise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers, it would be hard tosay. it does not seem to be used like the blade of the sword-fish andbill-fish; though some sailors tell me that the narwhale employs it fora rake in turning over the bottom of the sea for food. charley coffinsaid it was used for an ice-piercer; for the narwhale, rising to thesurface of the polar sea, and finding it sheeted with ice, thrusts hishorn up, and so breaks through. but you cannot prove either of thesesurmises to be correct. my own opinion is, that however this one-sidedhorn may really be used by the narwhale_however that may be_it wouldcertainly be very convenient to him for a folder in reading pamphlets.the narwhale i have heard called the tusked whale, the horned whale, andthe unicorn whale. he is certainly a curious example of the unicornismto be found in almost every kingdom of animated nature. from certaincloistered old authors i have gathered that this same sea-unicorn'shorn was in ancient days regarded as the great antidote against poison,and as such, preparations of it brought immense prices. it was alsodistilled to a volatile salts for fainting ladies, the same way that thehorns of the male deer are manufactured into hartshorn. originally itwas in itself accounted an object of great curiosity. black letter tellsme that sir martin frobisher on his return from that voyage, whenqueen bess did gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from a window ofgreenwich palace, as his bold ship sailed down the thames; "when sirmartin returned from that voyage," saith black letter, "on bendedknees he presented to her highness a prodigious long horn of thenarwhale, which for a long period after hung in the castle atwindsor." an irish author avers that the earl of leicester, on bendedknees, did likewise present to her highness another horn, pertaining toa land beast of the unicorn nature.the narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, being of amilk-white ground colour, dotted with round and oblong spots of black.his oil is very superior, clear and fine; but there is little of it, andhe is seldom hunted. he is mostly found in the circumpolar seas.book ii. (octavo), chapter iv. (killer)._of this whale little isprecisely known to the nantucketer, and nothing at all to the professednaturalist. from what i have seen of him at a distance, i should saythat he was about the bigness of a grampus. he is very savage_a sortof feegee fish. he sometimes takes the great folio whales by the lip,and hangs there like a leech, till the mighty brute is worried to death.the killer is never hunted. i never heard what sort of oil he has.exception might be taken to the name bestowed upon this whale, on theground of its indistinctness. for we are all killers, on land and onsea; bonapartes and sharks included.book ii. (octavo), chapter v. (thrasher)._this gentleman is famous forhis tail, which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his foes. he mountsthe folio whale's back, and as he swims, he works his passage byflogging him; as some schoolmasters get along in the world by a similarprocess. still less is known of the thrasher than of the killer. bothare outlaws, even in the lawless seas.thus ends book ii. (octavo), and begins book iii. (duodecimo).duodecimoes._these include the smaller whales. i. the huzza porpoise.ii. the algerine porpoise. iii. the mealy-mouthed porpoise.to those who have not chanced specially to study the subject, it maypossibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding four or fivefeet should be marshalled among whales_a word, which, in the popularsense, always conveys an idea of hugeness. but the creatures setdown above as duodecimoes are infallibly whales, by the terms of mydefinition of what a whale is_i.e. a spouting fish, with a horizontaltail.book iii. (duodecimo), chapter 1. (huzza porpoise)._this is thecommon porpoise found almost all over the globe. the name is of my ownbestowal; for there are more than one sort of porpoises, and somethingmust be done to distinguish them. i call him thus, because he alwaysswims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad sea keep tossingthemselves to heaven like caps in a fourth-of-july crowd. theirappearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner. full of finespirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows to windward. theyare the lads that always live before the wind. they are accounted alucky omen. if you yourself can withstand three cheers at beholdingthese vivacious fish, then heaven help ye; the spirit of godlygamesomeness is not in ye. a well-fed, plump huzza porpoise willyield you one good gallon of good oil. but the fine and delicate fluidextracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable. it is in request amongjewellers and watchmakers. sailors put it on their hones. porpoisemeat is good eating, you know. it may never have occurred to you thata porpoise spouts. indeed, his spout is so small that it is not veryreadily discernible. but the next time you have a chance, watch him; andyou will then see the great sperm whale himself in miniature.book iii. (duodecimo), chapter ii. (algerine porpoise)._a pirate. verysavage. he is only found, i think, in the pacific. he is somewhat largerthan the huzza porpoise, but much of the same general make. provoke him,and he will buckle to a shark. i have lowered for him many times, butnever yet saw him captured.book iii. (duodecimo), chapter iii. (mealy-mouthed porpoise)._thelargest kind of porpoise; and only found in the pacific, so far as it isknown. the only english name, by which he has hitherto been designated,is that of the fishers_right-whale porpoise, from the circumstancethat he is chiefly found in the vicinity of that folio. in shape, hediffers in some degree from the huzza porpoise, being of a less rotundand jolly girth; indeed, he is of quite a neat and gentleman-likefigure. he has no fins on his back (most other porpoises have), he hasa lovely tail, and sentimental indian eyes of a hazel hue. but hismealy-mouth spoils all. though his entire back down to his side fins isof a deep sable, yet a boundary line, distinct as the mark in a ship'shull, called the "bright waist," that line streaks him from stem tostern, with two separate colours, black above and white below. the whitecomprises part of his head, and the whole of his mouth, which makes himlook as if he had just escaped from a felonious visit to a meal-bag.a most mean and mealy aspect! his oil is much like that of the commonporpoise.beyond the duodecimo, this system does not proceed, inasmuch asthe porpoise is the smallest of the whales. above, you have all theleviathans of note. but there are a rabble of uncertain, fugitive,half-fabulous whales, which, as an american whaleman, i know byreputation, but not personally. i shall enumerate them by theirfore-castle appellations; for possibly such a list may be valuable tofuture investigators, who may complete what i have here but begun. ifany of the following whales, shall hereafter be caught and marked, thenhe can readily be incorporated into this system, according to his folio,octavo, or duodecimo magnitude:_the bottle-nose whale; the junk whale;the pudding-headed whale; the cape whale; the leading whale; the cannonwhale; the scragg whale; the coppered whale; the elephant whale; theiceberg whale; the quog whale; the blue whale; etc. from icelandic,dutch, and old english authorities, there might be quoted other lists ofuncertain whales, blessed with all manner of uncouth names. but i omitthem as altogether obsolete; and can hardly help suspecting them formere sounds, full of leviathanism, but signifying nothing.finally: it was stated at the outset, that this system would not behere, and at once, perfected. you cannot but plainly see that i havekept my word. but i now leave my cetological system standing thusunfinished, even as the great cathedral of cologne was left, with thecrane still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower. for smallerections may be finished by their first architects; grand ones, trueones, ever leave the copestone to posterity. god keep me from evercompleting anything. this whole book is but a draught_nay, but thedraught of a draught. oh, time, strength, cash, and patience!chapter 33. the specksnyder.concerning the officers of the whale-craft, this seems as good a placeas any to set down a little domestic peculiarity on ship-board, arisingfrom the existence of the harpooneer class of officers, a class unknownof course in any other marine than the whale-fleet.the large importance attached to the harpooneer's vocation is evincedby the fact, that originally in the old dutch fishery, two centuriesand more ago, the command of a whale ship was not wholly lodged inthe person now called the captain, but was divided between him and anofficer called the specksnyder. literally this word means fat-cutter;usage, however, in time made it equivalent to chief harpooneer. in thosedays, the captain's authority was restricted to the navigationand general management of the vessel; while over the whale-huntingdepartment and all its concerns, the specksnyder or chief harpooneerreigned supreme. in the british greenland fishery, under the corruptedtitle of specksioneer, this old dutch official is still retained, buthis former dignity is sadly abridged. at present he ranks simply assenior harpooneer; and as such, is but one of the captain's moreinferior subalterns. nevertheless, as upon the good conduct of theharpooneers the success of a whaling voyage largely depends, and sincein the american fishery he is not only an important officer in the boat,but under certain circumstances (night watches on a whaling ground) thecommand of the ship's deck is also his; therefore the grand politicalmaxim of the sea demands, that he should nominally live apart fromthe men before the mast, and be in some way distinguished as theirprofessional superior; though always, by them, familiarly regarded astheir social equal.now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and man at sea, isthis_the first lives aft, the last forward. hence, in whale-ships andmerchantmen alike, the mates have their quarters with the captain; andso, too, in most of the american whalers the harpooneers are lodged inthe after part of the ship. that is to say, they take their meals in thecaptain's cabin, and sleep in a place indirectly communicating withit.though the long period of a southern whaling voyage (by far the longestof all voyages now or ever made by man), the peculiar perils of it, andthe community of interest prevailing among a company, all of whom, highor low, depend for their profits, not upon fixed wages, but upon theircommon luck, together with their common vigilance, intrepidity, andhard work; though all these things do in some cases tend to beget a lessrigorous discipline than in merchantmen generally; yet, never mindhow much like an old mesopotamian family these whalemen may, in someprimitive instances, live together; for all that, the punctiliousexternals, at least, of the quarter-deck are seldom materially relaxed,and in no instance done away. indeed, many are the nantucket ships inwhich you will see the skipper parading his quarter-deck with an elatedgrandeur not surpassed in any military navy; nay, extorting almostas much outward homage as if he wore the imperial purple, and not theshabbiest of pilot-cloth.and though of all men the moody captain of the pequod was the leastgiven to that sort of shallowest assumption; and though the only homagehe ever exacted, was implicit, instantaneous obedience; though herequired no man to remove the shoes from his feet ere stepping uponthe quarter-deck; and though there were times when, owing to peculiarcircumstances connected with events hereafter to be detailed, headdressed them in unusual terms, whether of condescension or interrorem, or otherwise; yet even captain ahab was by no meansunobservant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea.nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behind thoseforms and usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself; incidentallymaking use of them for other and more private ends than they werelegitimately intended to subserve. that certain sultanism of his brain,which had otherwise in a good degree remained unmanifested; throughthose forms that same sultanism became incarnate in an irresistibledictatorship. for be a man's intellectual superiority what it will,it can never assume the practical, available supremacy over other men,without the aid of some sort of external arts and entrenchments, always,in themselves, more or less paltry and base. this it is, that for everkeeps god's true princes of the empire from the world's hustings;and leaves the highest honours that this air can give, to those menwho become famous more through their infinite inferiority to thechoice hidden handful of the divine inert, than through their undoubtedsuperiority over the dead level of the mass. such large virtue lurksin these small things when extreme political superstitions invest them,that in some royal instances even to idiot imbecility they have impartedpotency. but when, as in the case of nicholas the czar, the ringed crownof geographical empire encircles an imperial brain; then, the plebeianherds crouch abased before the tremendous centralization. nor, will thetragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitableness in its fullestsweep and direct swing, ever forget a hint, incidentally so important inhis art, as the one now alluded to.but ahab, my captain, still moves before me in all his nantucketgrimness and shagginess; and in this episode touching emperors andkings, i must not conceal that i have only to do with a poor oldwhale-hunter like him; and, therefore, all outward majestical trappingsand housings are denied me. oh, ahab! what shall be grand in thee, itmust needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in the deep, andfeatured in the unbodied air!chapter 34. the cabin-table.it is noon; and dough-boy, the steward, thrusting his pale loaf-of-breadface from the cabin-scuttle, announces dinner to his lord andmaster; who, sitting in the lee quarter-boat, has just been taking anobservation of the sun; and is now mutely reckoning the latitude on thesmooth, medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for that daily purpose onthe upper part of his ivory leg. from his complete inattention to thetidings, you would think that moody ahab had not heard his menial. butpresently, catching hold of the mizen shrouds, he swings himself tothe deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice, saying, "dinner, mr.starbuck," disappears into the cabin.when the last echo of his sultan's step has died away, and starbuck,the first emir, has every reason to suppose that he is seated, thenstarbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a few turns along the planks,and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says, with some touch ofpleasantness, "dinner, mr. stubb," and descends the scuttle. thesecond emir lounges about the rigging awhile, and then slightly shakingthe main brace, to see whether it will be all right with that importantrope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with a rapid "dinner,mr. flask," follows after his predecessors.but the third emir, now seeing himself all alone on the quarter-deck,seems to feel relieved from some curious restraint; for, tipping allsorts of knowing winks in all sorts of directions, and kicking off hisshoes, he strikes into a sharp but noiseless squall of a hornpipe rightover the grand turk's head; and then, by a dexterous sleight, pitchinghis cap up into the mizentop for a shelf, he goes down rollicking sofar at least as he remains visible from the deck, reversing all otherprocessions, by bringing up the rear with music. but ere stepping intothe cabin doorway below, he pauses, ships a new face altogether, and,then, independent, hilarious little flask enters king ahab's presence,in the character of abjectus, or the slave.it is not the least among the strange things bred by the intenseartificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open air of the decksome officers will, upon provocation, bear themselves boldly anddefyingly enough towards their commander; yet, ten to one, let thosevery officers the next moment go down to their customary dinner in thatsame commander's cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, not to saydeprecatory and humble air towards him, as he sits at the head ofthe table; this is marvellous, sometimes most comical. wherefore thisdifference? a problem? perhaps not. to have been belshazzar, king ofbabylon; and to have been belshazzar, not haughtily but courteously,therein certainly must have been some touch of mundane grandeur. but hewho in the rightly regal and intelligent spirit presides over his ownprivate dinner-table of invited guests, that man's unchallenged powerand dominion of individual influence for the time; that man's royaltyof state transcends belshazzar's, for belshazzar was not the greatest.who has but once dined his friends, has tasted what it is to be caesar.it is a witchery of social czarship which there is no withstanding.now, if to this consideration you superadd the official supremacy ofa ship-master, then, by inference, you will derive the cause of thatpeculiarity of sea-life just mentioned.over his ivory-inlaid table, ahab presided like a mute, manedsea-lion on the white coral beach, surrounded by his warlike but stilldeferential cubs. in his own proper turn, each officer waited to beserved. they were as little children before ahab; and yet, in ahab,there seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance. with one mind,their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man's knife, as he carvedthe chief dish before him. i do not suppose that for the world theywould have profaned that moment with the slightest observation, evenupon so neutral a topic as the weather. no! and when reaching out hisknife and fork, between which the slice of beef was locked, ahab therebymotioned starbuck's plate towards him, the mate received his meat asthough receiving alms; and cut it tenderly; and a little startedif, perchance, the knife grazed against the plate; and chewed itnoiselessly; and swallowed it, not without circumspection. for, likethe coronation banquet at frankfort, where the german emperor profoundlydines with the seven imperial electors, so these cabin meals weresomehow solemn meals, eaten in awful silence; and yet at table old ahabforbade not conversation; only he himself was dumb. what a relief it wasto choking stubb, when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below. andpoor little flask, he was the youngest son, and little boy of this wearyfamily party. his were the shinbones of the saline beef; his would havebeen the drumsticks. for flask to have presumed to help himself, thismust have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first degree. hadhe helped himself at that table, doubtless, never more would he havebeen able to hold his head up in this honest world; nevertheless,strange to say, ahab never forbade him. and had flask helped himself,the chances were ahab had never so much as noticed it. least of all, didflask presume to help himself to butter. whether he thought the ownersof the ship denied it to him, on account of its clotting his clear,sunny complexion; or whether he deemed that, on so long a voyage in suchmarketless waters, butter was at a premium, and therefore was not forhim, a subaltern; however it was, flask, alas! was a butterless man!another thing. flask was the last person down at the dinner, and flaskis the first man up. consider! for hereby flask's dinner was badlyjammed in point of time. starbuck and stubb both had the start of him;and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear. if stubbeven, who is but a peg higher than flask, happens to have but a smallappetite, and soon shows symptoms of concluding his repast, then flaskmust bestir himself, he will not get more than three mouthfuls that day;for it is against holy usage for stubb to precede flask to the deck.therefore it was that flask once admitted in private, that ever since hehad arisen to the dignity of an officer, from that moment he had neverknown what it was to be otherwise than hungry, more or less. for whathe ate did not so much relieve his hunger, as keep it immortal in him.peace and satisfaction, thought flask, have for ever departed frommy stomach. i am an officer; but, how i wish i could fish a bit ofold-fashioned beef in the forecastle, as i used to when i was beforethe mast. there's the fruits of promotion now; there's the vanity ofglory: there's the insanity of life! besides, if it were so thatany mere sailor of the pequod had a grudge against flask in flask'sofficial capacity, all that sailor had to do, in order to obtain amplevengeance, was to go aft at dinner-time, and get a peep at flask throughthe cabin sky-light, sitting silly and dumfoundered before awful ahab.now, ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first tablein the pequod's cabin. after their departure, taking place in invertedorder to their arrival, the canvas cloth was cleared, or rather wasrestored to some hurried order by the pallid steward. and then the threeharpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being its residuary legatees.they made a sort of temporary servants' hall of the high and mightycabin.in strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and namelessinvisible domineerings of the captain's table, was the entirecare-free license and ease, the almost frantic democracy of thoseinferior fellows the harpooneers. while their masters, the mates, seemedafraid of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the harpooneerschewed their food with such a relish that there was a report to it. theydined like lords; they filled their bellies like indian ships allday loading with spices. such portentous appetites had queequeg andtashtego, that to fill out the vacancies made by the previous repast,often the pale dough-boy was fain to bring on a great baron ofsalt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid ox. and if he were notlively about it, if he did not go with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump, thentashtego had an ungentlemanly way of accelerating him by darting a forkat his back, harpoon-wise. and once daggoo, seized with a sudden humor,assisted dough-boy's memory by snatching him up bodily, and thrustinghis head into a great empty wooden trencher, while tashtego, knife inhand, began laying out the circle preliminary to scalping him. hewas naturally a very nervous, shuddering sort of little fellow, thisbread-faced steward; the progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospitalnurse. and what with the standing spectacle of the black terrificahab, and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these three savages,dough-boy's whole life was one continual lip-quiver. commonly, afterseeing the harpooneers furnished with all things they demanded, hewould escape from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining, andfearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door, till all wasover.it was a sight to see queequeg seated over against tashtego, opposinghis filed teeth to the indian's: crosswise to them, daggoo seated onthe floor, for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head tothe low carlines; at every motion of his colossal limbs, making the lowcabin framework to shake, as when an african elephant goes passenger ina ship. but for all this, the great negro was wonderfully abstemious,not to say dainty. it seemed hardly possible that by such comparativelysmall mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality diffused through so broad,baronial, and superb a person. but, doubtless, this noble savage fedstrong and drank deep of the abounding element of air; and through hisdilated nostrils snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds. not bybeef or by bread, are giants made or nourished. but queequeg, he had amortal, barbaric smack of the lip in eating_an ugly sound enough_somuch so, that the trembling dough-boy almost looked to see whetherany marks of teeth lurked in his own lean arms. and when he would heartashtego singing out for him to produce himself, that his bones might bepicked, the simple-witted steward all but shattered the crockery hanginground him in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy. nor did thewhetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets, for theirlances and other weapons; and with which whetstones, at dinner, theywould ostentatiously sharpen their knives; that grating sound did not atall tend to tranquillize poor dough-boy. how could he forget that in hisisland days, queequeg, for one, must certainly have been guilty of somemurderous, convivial indiscretions. alas! dough-boy! hard fares thewhite waiter who waits upon cannibals. not a napkin should he carry onhis arm, but a buckler. in good time, though, to his great delight,the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart; to his credulous,fable-mongering ears, all their martial bones jingling in them at everystep, like moorish scimetars in scabbards.but, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and nominally livedthere; still, being anything but sedentary in their habits, they werescarcely ever in it except at mealtimes, and just before sleeping-time,when they passed through it to their own peculiar quarters.in this one matter, ahab seemed no exception to most american whalecaptains, who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion that by rightsthe ship's cabin belongs to them; and that it is by courtesy alonethat anybody else is, at any time, permitted there. so that, in realtruth, the mates and harpooneers of the pequod might more properly besaid to have lived out of the cabin than in it. for when they did enterit, it was something as a street-door enters a house; turning inwardsfor a moment, only to be turned out the next; and, as a permanent thing,residing in the open air. nor did they lose much hereby; in the cabinwas no companionship; socially, ahab was inaccessible. though nominallyincluded in the census of christendom, he was still an alien to it. helived in the world, as the last of the grisly bears lived in settledmissouri. and as when spring and summer had departed, that wild logan ofthe woods, burying himself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the winterthere, sucking his own paws; so, in his inclement, howling old age,ahab's soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed uponthe sullen paws of its gloom!chapter 35. the mast-head.it was during the more pleasant weather, that in due rotation with theother seamen my first mast-head came round.in most american whalemen the mast-heads are manned almostsimultaneously with the vessel's leaving her port; even though she mayhave fifteen thousand miles, and more, to sail ere reaching her propercruising ground. and if, after a three, four, or five years' voyageshe is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her_say, an empty vialeven_then, her mast-heads are kept manned to the last; and nottill her skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port, does shealtogether relinquish the hope of capturing one whale more.now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is a veryancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiate here.i take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the oldegyptians; because, in all my researches, i find none prior to them.for though their progenitors, the builders of babel, must doubtless, bytheir tower, have intended to rear the loftiest mast-head in all asia,or africa either; yet (ere the final truck was put to it) as that greatstone mast of theirs may be said to have gone by the board, in the dreadgale of god's wrath; therefore, we cannot give these babel builderspriority over the egyptians. and that the egyptians were a nation ofmast-head standers, is an assertion based upon the general belief amongarchaeologists, that the first pyramids were founded for astronomicalpurposes: a theory singularly supported by the peculiar stair-likeformation of all four sides of those edifices; whereby, with prodigiouslong upliftings of their legs, those old astronomers were wont to mountto the apex, and sing out for new stars; even as the look-outs of amodern ship sing out for a sail, or a whale just bearing in sight. insaint stylites, the famous christian hermit of old times, who built hima lofty stone pillar in the desert and spent the whole latter portion ofhis life on its summit, hoisting his food from the ground with atackle; in him we have a remarkable instance of a dauntlessstander-of-mast-heads; who was not to be driven from his place by fogsor frosts, rain, hail, or sleet; but valiantly facing everything out tothe last, literally died at his post. of modern standers-of-mast-headswe have but a lifeless set; mere stone, iron, and bronze men; who,though well capable of facing out a stiff gale, are still entirelyincompetent to the business of singing out upon discovering any strangesight. there is napoleon; who, upon the top of the column of vendome,stands with arms folded, some one hundred and fifty feet in the air;careless, now, who rules the decks below; whether louis philippe, louisblanc, or louis the devil. great washington, too, stands high alofton his towering main-mast in baltimore, and like one of hercules'pillars, his column marks that point of human grandeur beyond which fewmortals will go. admiral nelson, also, on a capstan of gun-metal, standshis mast-head in trafalgar square; and ever when most obscured by thatlondon smoke, token is yet given that a hidden hero is there; forwhere there is smoke, must be fire. but neither great washington, nornapoleon, nor nelson, will answer a single hail from below, howevermadly invoked to befriend by their counsels the distracted decksupon which they gaze; however it may be surmised, that their spiritspenetrate through the thick haze of the future, and descry what shoalsand what rocks must be shunned.it may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-headstanders of the land with those of the sea; but that in truth it isnot so, is plainly evinced by an item for which obed macy, the solehistorian of nantucket, stands accountable. the worthy obed tells us,that in the early times of the whale fishery, ere ships were regularlylaunched in pursuit of the game, the people of that island erected loftyspars along the sea-coast, to which the look-outs ascended by meansof nailed cleats, something as fowls go upstairs in a hen-house. a fewyears ago this same plan was adopted by the bay whalemen of new zealand,who, upon descrying the game, gave notice to the ready-manned boats nighthe beach. but this custom has now become obsolete; turn we then to theone proper mast-head, that of a whale-ship at sea. the three mast-headsare kept manned from sun-rise to sun-set; the seamen taking theirregular turns (as at the helm), and relieving each other every twohours. in the serene weather of the tropics it is exceedingly pleasantthe mast-head; nay, to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful. thereyou stand, a hundred feet above the silent decks, striding along thedeep, as if the masts were gigantic stilts, while beneath you andbetween your legs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea, evenas ships once sailed between the boots of the famous colossus at oldrhodes. there you stand, lost in the infinite series of the sea, withnothing ruffled but the waves. the tranced ship indolently rolls; thedrowsy trade winds blow; everything resolves you into languor. for themost part, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime uneventfulness investsyou; you hear no news; read no gazettes; extras with startling accountsof commonplaces never delude you into unnecessary excitements; you hearof no domestic afflictions; bankrupt securities; fall of stocks; arenever troubled with the thought of what you shall have for dinner_forall your meals for three years and more are snugly stowed in casks, andyour bill of fare is immutable.in one of those southern whalesmen, on a long three or four years'voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various hours you spend at themast-head would amount to several entire months. and it is much to bedeplored that the place to which you devote so considerable a portionof the whole term of your natural life, should be so sadly destituteof anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness, or adapted to breed acomfortable localness of feeling, such as pertains to a bed, a hammock,a hearse, a sentry box, a pulpit, a coach, or any other of those smalland snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate themselves. yourmost usual point of perch is the head of the t' gallant-mast, whereyou stand upon two thin parallel sticks (almost peculiar to whalemen)called the t' gallant cross-trees. here, tossed about by the sea, thebeginner feels about as cosy as he would standing on a bull's horns.to be sure, in cold weather you may carry your house aloft with you, inthe shape of a watch-coat; but properly speaking the thickest watch-coatis no more of a house than the unclad body; for as the soul is gluedinside of its fleshy tabernacle, and cannot freely move about in it, noreven move out of it, without running great risk of perishing (like anignorant pilgrim crossing the snowy alps in winter); so a watch-coatis not so much of a house as it is a mere envelope, or additional skinencasing you. you cannot put a shelf or chest of drawers in your body,and no more can you make a convenient closet of your watch-coat.concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads of asouthern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little tents orpulpits, called crow's-nests, in which the look-outs of a greenlandwhaler are protected from the inclement weather of the frozen seas. inthe fireside narrative of captain sleet, entitled "a voyage amongthe icebergs, in quest of the greenland whale, and incidentally for there-discovery of the lost icelandic colonies of old greenland;" inthis admirable volume, all standers of mast-heads are furnished witha charmingly circumstantial account of the then recently inventedcrow's-nest of the glacier, which was the name of captain sleet'sgood craft. he called it the sleet's crow's-nest, in honour ofhimself; he being the original inventor and patentee, and free from allridiculous false delicacy, and holding that if we call our own childrenafter our own names (we fathers being the original inventors andpatentees), so likewise should we denominate after ourselves anyother apparatus we may beget. in shape, the sleet's crow's-nest issomething like a large tierce or pipe; it is open above, however, whereit is furnished with a movable side-screen to keep to windward of yourhead in a hard gale. being fixed on the summit of the mast, you ascendinto it through a little trap-hatch in the bottom. on the after side,or side next the stern of the ship, is a comfortable seat, with a lockerunderneath for umbrellas, comforters, and coats. in front is a leatherrack, in which to keep your speaking trumpet, pipe, telescope, and othernautical conveniences. when captain sleet in person stood his mast-headin this crow's-nest of his, he tells us that he always had a riflewith him (also fixed in the rack), together with a powder flask andshot, for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, or vagrant seaunicorns infesting those waters; for you cannot successfully shoot atthem from the deck owing to the resistance of the water, but to shootdown upon them is a very different thing. now, it was plainly a labor oflove for captain sleet to describe, as he does, all the little detailedconveniences of his crow's-nest; but though he so enlarges upon manyof these, and though he treats us to a very scientific account of hisexperiments in this crow's-nest, with a small compass he kept therefor the purpose of counteracting the errors resulting from what iscalled the "local attraction" of all binnacle magnets; an errorascribable to the horizontal vicinity of the iron in the ship'splanks, and in the glacier's case, perhaps, to there having been somany broken-down blacksmiths among her crew; i say, that though thecaptain is very discreet and scientific here, yet, for all his learned"binnacle deviations," "azimuth compass observations," and"approximate errors," he knows very well, captain sleet, that he wasnot so much immersed in those profound magnetic meditations, as tofail being attracted occasionally towards that well replenished littlecase-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side of his crow's nest,within easy reach of his hand. though, upon the whole, i greatly admireand even love the brave, the honest, and learned captain; yet i takeit very ill of him that he should so utterly ignore that case-bottle,seeing what a faithful friend and comforter it must have been, whilewith mittened fingers and hooded head he was studying the mathematicsaloft there in that bird's nest within three or four perches of thepole.but if we southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft ascaptain sleet and his greenlandmen were; yet that disadvantage isgreatly counter-balanced by the widely contrasting serenity of thoseseductive seas in which we south fishers mostly float. for one, i usedto lounge up the rigging very leisurely, resting in the top to have achat with queequeg, or any one else off duty whom i might find there;then ascending a little way further, and throwing a lazy leg over thetop-sail yard, take a preliminary view of the watery pastures, and so atlast mount to my ultimate destination.let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly admit that i kept butsorry guard. with the problem of the universe revolving in me, howcould i_being left completely to myself at such a thought-engenderingaltitude_how could i but lightly hold my obligations to observe allwhale-ships' standing orders, "keep your weather eye open, and singout every time."and let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye ship-owners ofnantucket! beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any lad withlean brow and hollow eye; given to unseasonable meditativeness; and whooffers to ship with the phaedon instead of bowditch in his head. bewareof such an one, i say; your whales must be seen before they can bekilled; and this sunken-eyed young platonist will tow you ten wakesround the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the richer. norare these monitions at all unneeded. for nowadays, the whale-fisheryfurnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, and absent-mindedyoung men, disgusted with the carking cares of earth, and seekingsentiment in tar and blubber. childe harold not unfrequently percheshimself upon the mast-head of some luckless disappointed whale-ship, andin moody phrase ejaculates:_"roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll! ten thousandblubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain."very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-mindedyoung philosophers to task, upbraiding them with not feeling sufficient"interest" in the voyage; half-hinting that they are so hopelesslylost to all honourable ambition, as that in their secret souls theywould rather not see whales than otherwise. but all in vain; thoseyoung platonists have a notion that their vision is imperfect; they areshort-sighted; what use, then, to strain the visual nerve? they haveleft their opera-glasses at home."why, thou monkey," said a harpooneer to one of these lads,"we've been cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast notraised a whale yet. whales are scarce as hen's teeth whenever thou artup here." perhaps they were; or perhaps there might have beenshoals of them in the far horizon; but lulled into such an opium-likelistlessness of vacant, unconscious reverie is this absent-minded youthby the blending cadence of waves with thoughts, that at last he loseshis identity; takes the mystic ocean at his feet for the visible imageof that deep, blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankind and nature; andevery strange, half-seen, gliding, beautiful thing that eludes him;every dimly-discovered, uprising fin of some undiscernible form, seemsto him the embodiment of those elusive thoughts that only people thesoul by continually flitting through it. in this enchanted mood, thyspirit ebbs away to whence it came; becomes diffused through time andspace; like crammer's (thomas cranmer) sprinkled pantheistic ashes,forming at last a part of every shore the round globe over.there is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life imparted by agently rolling ship; by her, borrowed from the sea; by the sea, fromthe inscrutable tides of god. but while this sleep, this dream is on ye,move your foot or hand an inch; slip your hold at all; and your identitycomes back in horror. over descartian vortices you hover. and perhaps,at mid-day, in the fairest weather, with one half-throttled shriek youdrop through that transparent air into the summer sea, no more to risefor ever. heed it well, ye pantheists!chapter 36. the quarter-deck.(enter ahab: then, all)it was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that onemorning shortly after breakfast, ahab, as was his wont, ascended thecabin-gangway to the deck. there most sea-captains usually walk at thathour, as country gentlemen, after the same meal, take a few turns in thegarden.soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced his oldrounds, upon planks so familiar to his tread, that they were all overdented, like geological stones, with the peculiar mark of his walk. didyou fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow; there also,you would see still stranger foot-prints_the foot-prints of his oneunsleeping, ever-pacing thought.but on the occasion in question, those dents looked deeper, even ashis nervous step that morning left a deeper mark. and, so full of histhought was ahab, that at every uniform turn that he made, now at themain-mast and now at the binnacle, you could almost see that thoughtturn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he paced; so completelypossessing him, indeed, that it all but seemed the inward mould of everyouter movement."d'ye mark him, flask?" whispered stubb; "the chick that's inhim pecks the shell. _twill soon be out."the hours wore on;_ahab now shut up within his cabin; anon, pacing thedeck, with the same intense bigotry of purpose in his aspect.it drew near the close of day. suddenly he came to a halt by thebulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there, and withone hand grasping a shroud, he ordered starbuck to send everybody aft."sir!" said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or never givenon ship-board except in some extraordinary case."send everybody aft," repeated ahab. "mast-heads, there! comedown!"when the entire ship's company were assembled, and with curious andnot wholly unapprehensive faces, were eyeing him, for he looked notunlike the weather horizon when a storm is coming up, ahab, afterrapidly glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting his eyes among thecrew, started from his standpoint; and as though not a soul werenigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck. with bent head andhalf-slouched hat he continued to pace, unmindful of the wonderingwhispering among the men; till stubb cautiously whispered to flask,that ahab must have summoned them there for the purpose of witnessinga pedestrian feat. but this did not last long. vehemently pausing, hecried:_"what do ye do when ye see a whale, men?""sing out for him!" was the impulsive rejoinder from a score ofclubbed voices."good!" cried ahab, with a wild approval in his tones; observing thehearty animation into which his unexpected question had so magneticallythrown them."and what do ye next, men?""lower away, and after him!""and what tune is it ye pull to, men?""a dead whale or a stove boat!"more and more strangely and fiercely glad and approving, grew thecountenance of the old man at every shout; while the mariners beganto gaze curiously at each other, as if marvelling how it was that theythemselves became so excited at such seemingly purposeless questions.but, they were all eagerness again, as ahab, now half-revolving in hispivot-hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud, and tightly, almostconvulsively grasping it, addressed them thus:_"all ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders abouta white whale. look ye! d'ye see this spanish ounce ofgold?"_holding up a broad bright coin to the sun_"it is asixteen dollar piece, men. d'ye see it? mr. starbuck, hand me yontop-maul."while the mate was getting the hammer, ahab, without speaking, wasslowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket, as ifto heighten its lustre, and without using any words was meanwhilelowly humming to himself, producing a sound so strangely muffled andinarticulate that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels of hisvitality in him.receiving the top-maul from starbuck, he advanced towards the main-mastwith the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the gold with theother, and with a high raised voice exclaiming: "whosoever of yeraises me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked jaw;whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, with three holespunctured in his starboard fluke_look ye, whosoever of ye raises methat same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, my boys!""huzza! huzza!" cried the seamen, as with swinging tarpaulins theyhailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast."it's a white whale, i say," resumed ahab, as he threw down thetopmaul: "a white whale. skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp forwhite water; if ye see but a bubble, sing out."all this while tashtego, daggoo, and queequeg had looked on with evenmore intense interest and surprise than the rest, and at the mentionof the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had started as if each wasseparately touched by some specific recollection."captain ahab," said tashtego, "that white whale must be the samethat some call moby dick.""moby dick?" shouted ahab. "do ye know the white whale then,tash?""does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down?" saidthe gay-header deliberately."and has he a curious spout, too," said daggoo, "very bushy, evenfor a parmacetty, and mighty quick, captain ahab?""and he have one, two, three_oh! good many iron in him hide, too,captain," cried queequeg disjointedly, "all twiske-tee be-twisk,like him_him_" faltering hard for a word, and screwing his handround and round as though uncorking a bottle_"like him_him_""corkscrew!" cried ahab, "aye, queequeg, the harpoons lie alltwisted and wrenched in him; aye, daggoo, his spout is a big one, likea whole shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our nantucket wool afterthe great annual sheep-shearing; aye, tashtego, and he fan-tails likea split jib in a squall. death and devils! men, it is moby dick ye haveseen_moby dick_moby dick!""captain ahab," said starbuck, who, with stubb and flask, had thusfar been eyeing his superior with increasing surprise, but at lastseemed struck with a thought which somewhat explained all the wonder."captain ahab, i have heard of moby dick_but it was not moby dickthat took off thy leg?""who told thee that?" cried ahab; then pausing, "aye, starbuck;aye, my hearties all round; it was moby dick that dismasted me; mobydick that brought me to this dead stump i stand on now. aye, aye," heshouted with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of a heart-strickenmoose; "aye, aye! it was that accursed white whale that razed me; madea poor pegging lubber of me for ever and a day!" then tossing botharms, with measureless imprecations he shouted out: "aye, aye! andi'll chase him round good hope, and round the horn, and round thenorway maelstrom, and round perdition's flames before i give him up.and this is what ye have shipped for, men! to chase that white whale onboth sides of land, and over all sides of earth, till he spouts blackblood and rolls fin out. what say ye, men, will ye splice hands on it,now? i think ye do look brave.""aye, aye!" shouted the harpooneers and seamen, running closer tothe excited old man: "a sharp eye for the white whale; a sharp lancefor moby dick!""god bless ye," he seemed to half sob and half shout. "god blessye, men. steward! go draw the great measure of grog. but what's thislong face about, mr. starbuck; wilt thou not chase the white whale? artnot game for moby dick?""i am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of death too, captainahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the business we follow; buti came here to hunt whales, not my commander's vengeance. how manybarrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest it, captainahab? it will not fetch thee much in our nantucket market.""nantucket market! hoot! but come closer, starbuck; thou requiresta little lower layer. if money's to be the measurer, man, and theaccountants have computed their great counting-house the globe, bygirdling it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch; then, letme tell thee, that my vengeance will fetch a great premium here!""he smites his chest," whispered stubb, "what's that for?methinks it rings most vast, but hollow.""vengeance on a dumb brute!" cried starbuck, "that simply smotethee from blindest instinct! madness! to be enraged with a dumb thing,captain ahab, seems blasphemous.""hark ye yet again_the little lower layer. all visible objects, man,are but as pasteboard masks. but in each event_in the living act,the undoubted deed_there, some unknown but still reasoning thing putsforth the mouldings of its features from behind the unreasoning mask.if man will strike, strike through the mask! how can the prisoner reachoutside except by thrusting through the wall? to me, the white whale isthat wall, shoved near to me. sometimes i think there's naught beyond.but _tis enough. he tasks me; he heaps me; i see in him outrageousstrength, with an inscrutable malice sinewing it. that inscrutable thingis chiefly what i hate; and be the white whale agent, or be the whitewhale principal, i will wreak that hate upon him. talk not to me ofblasphemy, man; i'd strike the sun if it insulted me. for could thesun do that, then could i do the other; since there is ever a sort offair play herein, jealousy presiding over all creations. but not mymaster, man, is even that fair play. who's over me? truth hath noconfines. take off thine eye! more intolerable than fiends' glaringsis a doltish stare! so, so; thou reddenest and palest; my heat hasmelted thee to anger-glow. but look ye, starbuck, what is said in heat,that thing unsays itself. there are men from whom warm words are smallindignity. i meant not to incense thee. let it go. look! see yonderturkish cheeks of spotted tawn_living, breathing pictures painted bythe sun. the pagan leopards_the unrecking and unworshipping things,that live; and seek, and give no reasons for the torrid life they feel!the crew, man, the crew! are they not one and all with ahab, in thismatter of the whale? see stubb! he laughs! see yonder chilian! hesnorts to think of it. stand up amid the general hurricane, thy one tostsapling cannot, starbuck! and what is it? reckon it. _tis but to helpstrike a fin; no wondrous feat for starbuck. what is it more? from thisone poor hunt, then, the best lance out of all nantucket, surely he willnot hang back, when every foremast-hand has clutched a whetstone? ah!constrainings seize thee; i see! the billow lifts thee! speak, butspeak!_aye, aye! thy silence, then, that voices thee. (aside)something shot from my dilated nostrils, he has inhaled it in his lungs.starbuck now is mine; cannot oppose me now, without rebellion.""god keep me!_keep us all!" murmured starbuck, lowly.but in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the mate, ahabdid not hear his foreboding invocation; nor yet the low laugh from thehold; nor yet the presaging vibrations of the winds in the cordage;nor yet the hollow flap of the sails against the masts, as for a momenttheir hearts sank in. for again starbuck's downcast eyes lighted upwith the stubbornness of life; the subterranean laugh died away; thewinds blew on; the sails filled out; the ship heaved and rolled asbefore. ah, ye admonitions and warnings! why stay ye not when ye come?but rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye shadows! yet not somuch predictions from without, as verifications of the foregoingthings within. for with little external to constrain us, the innermostnecessities in our being, these still drive us on."the measure! the measure!" cried ahab.receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the harpooneers, heordered them to produce their weapons. then ranging them before him nearthe capstan, with their harpoons in their hands, while his three matesstood at his side with their lances, and the rest of the ship'scompany formed a circle round the group; he stood for an instantsearchingly eyeing every man of his crew. but those wild eyes methis, as the bloodshot eyes of the prairie wolves meet the eye of theirleader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of the bison; but,alas! only to fall into the hidden snare of the indian."drink and pass!" he cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to thenearest seaman. "the crew alone now drink. round with it, round! shortdraughts_long swallows, men; _tis hot as satan's hoof. so, so;it goes round excellently. it spiralizes in ye; forks out at theserpent-snapping eye. well done; almost drained. that way it went, thisway it comes. hand it me_here's a hollow! men, ye seem the years; sobrimming life is gulped and gone. steward, refill!"attend now, my braves. i have mustered ye all round this capstan;and ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye harpooneers, stand therewith your irons; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that i may in somesort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers before me. o men,you will yet see that_ha! boy, come back? bad pennies come not sooner.hand it me. why, now, this pewter had run brimming again, were't notthou st. vitus' imp_away, thou ague!"advance, ye mates! cross your lances full before me. well done! letme touch the axis." so saying, with extended arm, he grasped thethree level, radiating lances at their crossed centre; while so doing,suddenly and nervously twitched them; meanwhile, glancing intently fromstarbuck to stubb; from stubb to flask. it seemed as though, by somenameless, interior volition, he would fain have shocked into them thesame fiery emotion accumulated within the leyden jar of his own magneticlife. the three mates quailed before his strong, sustained, and mysticaspect. stubb and flask looked sideways from him; the honest eye ofstarbuck fell downright."in vain!" cried ahab; "but, maybe, _tis well. for did ye threebut once take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing, thathad perhaps expired from out me. perchance, too, it would have droppedye dead. perchance ye need it not. down lances! and now, ye mates, i doappoint ye three cupbearers to my three pagan kinsmen there_yon threemost honourable gentlemen and noblemen, my valiant harpooneers. disdainthe task? what, when the great pope washes the feet of beggars, usinghis tiara for ewer? oh, my sweet cardinals! your own condescension, thatshall bend ye to it. i do not order ye; ye will it. cut your seizingsand draw the poles, ye harpooneers!"silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood with thedetached iron part of their harpoons, some three feet long, held, barbsup, before him."stab me not with that keen steel! cant them; cant them over! knowye not the goblet end? turn up the socket! so, so; now, ye cup-bearers,advance. the irons! take them; hold them while i fill!" forthwith,slowly going from one officer to the other, he brimmed the harpoonsockets with the fiery waters from the pewter."now, three to three, ye stand. commend the murderous chalices! bestowthem, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble league. ha!starbuck! but the deed is done! yon ratifying sun now waits to sit uponit. drink, ye harpooneers! drink and swear, ye men that man the deathfulwhaleboat's bow_death to moby dick! god hunt us all, if we do nothunt moby dick to his death!" the long, barbed steel goblets werelifted; and to cries and maledictions against the white whale, thespirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss. starbuck paled,and turned, and shivered. once more, and finally, the replenished pewterwent the rounds among the frantic crew; when, waving his free hand tothem, they all dispersed; and ahab retired within his cabin.chapter 37. sunset.the cabin; by the stern windows; ahab sitting alone, and gazing out.i leave a white and turbid wake; pale waters, paler cheeks, where'eri sail. the envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track; let them;but first i pass.yonder, by ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm waves blush likewine. the gold brow plumbs the blue. the diver sun_slow dived fromnoon_goes down; my soul mounts up! she wearies with her endless hill.is, then, the crown too heavy that i wear? this iron crown of lombardy.yet is it bright with many a gem; i the wearer, see not its farflashings; but darkly feel that i wear that, that dazzlingly confounds._tis iron_that i know_not gold. _tis split, too_that i feel;the jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat against the solidmetal; aye, steel skull, mine; the sort that needs no helmet in the mostbrain-battering fight!dry heat upon my brow? oh! time was, when as the sunrise nobly spurredme, so the sunset soothed. no more. this lovely light, it lights not me;all loveliness is anguish to me, since i can ne'er enjoy. gifted withthe high perception, i lack the low, enjoying power; damned, most subtlyand most malignantly! damned in the midst of paradise! good night_goodnight! (waving his hand, he moves from the window.)_twas not so hard a task. i thought to find one stubborn, at theleast; but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels, andthey revolve. or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder, theyall stand before me; and i their match. oh, hard! that to fire others,the match itself must needs be wasting! what i've dared, i'vewilled; and what i've willed, i'll do! they think me mad_starbuckdoes; but i'm demoniac, i am madness maddened! that wild madnessthat's only calm to comprehend itself! the prophecy was that i shouldbe dismembered; and_aye! i lost this leg. i now prophesy that i willdismember my dismemberer. now, then, be the prophet and the fulfillerone. that's more than ye, ye great gods, ever were. i laugh and hootat ye, ye cricket-players, ye pugilists, ye deaf burkes and blindedbendigoes! i will not say as schoolboys do to bullies_take some one ofyour own size; don't pommel me! no, ye've knocked me down, and i amup again; but ye have run and hidden. come forth from behind your cottonbags! i have no long gun to reach ye. come, ahab's compliments to ye;come and see if ye can swerve me. swerve me? ye cannot swerve me, elseye swerve yourselves! man has ye there. swerve me? the path to my fixedpurpose is laid with iron rails, whereon my soul is grooved to run.over unsounded gorges, through the rifled hearts of mountains, undertorrents' beds, unerringly i rush! naught's an obstacle, naught'san angle to the iron way!chapter 38. dusk.by the mainmast; starbuck leaning against it.my soul is more than matched; she's overmanned; and by a madman!insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field! buthe drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me! i think i seehis impious end; but feel that i must help him to it. will i, nill i,the ineffable thing has tied me to him; tows me with a cable i have noknife to cut. horrible old man! who's over him, he cries;_aye, hewould be a democrat to all above; look, how he lords it over all below!oh! i plainly see my miserable office,_to obey, rebelling; and worseyet, to hate with touch of pity! for in his eyes i read some lurid woewould shrivel me up, had i it. yet is there hope. time and tide flowwide. the hated whale has the round watery world to swim in, as thesmall gold-fish has its glassy globe. his heaven-insulting purpose, godmay wedge aside. i would up heart, were it not like lead. but my wholeclock's run down; my heart the all-controlling weight, i have no keyto lift again._a burst of revelry from the forecastle._oh, god! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch of humanmothers in them! whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea. the white whaleis their demigorgon. hark! the infernal orgies! that revelry is forward!mark the unfaltering silence aft! methinks it pictures life. foremostthrough the sparkling sea shoots on the gay, embattled, banteringbow, but only to drag dark ahab after it, where he broods within hissternward cabin, builded over the dead water of the wake, and furtheron, hunted by its wolfish gurglings. the long howl thrills me through!peace! ye revellers, and set the watch! oh, life! _tis in an hour likethis, with soul beat down and held to knowledge,_as wild, untutoredthings are forced to feed_oh, life! _tis now that i do feel thelatent horror in thee! but _tis not me! that horror's out of me! andwith the soft feeling of the human in me, yet will i try to fight ye,ye grim, phantom futures! stand by me, hold me, bind me, o ye blessedinfluences!chapter 39. first night watch. fore-top.(stubb solus, and mending a brace.)ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!_i've been thinking over itever since, and that ha, ha's the final consequence. why so? becausea laugh's the wisest, easiest answer to all that's queer; and comewhat will, one comfort's always left_that unfailing comfort is,it's all predestinated. i heard not all his talk with starbuck; but tomy poor eye starbuck then looked something as i the other evening felt.be sure the old mogul has fixed him, too. i twigged it, knew it; had hadthe gift, might readily have prophesied it_for when i clapped myeye upon his skull i saw it. well, stubb, wise stubb_that's mytitle_well, stubb, what of it, stubb? here's a carcase. i knownot all that may be coming, but be it what it will, i'll go to itlaughing. such a waggish leering as lurks in all your horribles! i feelfunny. fa, la! lirra, skirra! what's my juicy little pear at homedoing now? crying its eyes out?_giving a party to the last arrivedharpooneers, i dare say, gay as a frigate's pennant, and so am i_fa,la! lirra, skirra! oh_we'll drink to-night with hearts as light, to love, as gay andfleeting as bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim, and break on thelips while meeting.a brave stave that_who calls? mr. starbuck? aye, aye, sir_(aside)he's my superior, he has his too, if i'm not mistaken._aye, aye,sir, just through with this job_coming.chapter 40. midnight, forecastle. harpooneers and sailors.(foresail rises and discovers the watch standing, lounging, leaning, andlying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus.) farewell and adieu to you, spanish ladies! farewell and adieu to you, ladies of spain! our captain's commanded._1st nantucket sailor. oh, boys, don't be sentimental; it's bad forthe digestion! take a tonic, follow me! (sings, and all follow) our captain stood upon the deck, a spy-glass in his hand, a viewing of those gallant whales that blew at every strand. oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys, and by your braces stand, and we'll have one of those fine whales, hand, boys, over hand! so, be cheery, my lads! may your hearts never fail! while the bold harpooner is striking the whale!mate's voice from the quarter-deck. eight bells there, forward!2nd nantucket sailor. avast the chorus! eight bells there! d'ye hear,bell-boy? strike the bell eight, thou pip! thou blackling! and let mecall the watch. i've the sort of mouth for that_the hogshead mouth.so, so, (thrusts his head down the scuttle,) star-bo-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!eight bells there below! tumble up!dutch sailor. grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that. i markthis in our old mogul's wine; it's quite as deadening to some asfilliping to others. we sing; they sleep_aye, lie down there, likeground-tier butts. at _em again! there, take this copper-pump, andhail _em through it. tell _em to avast dreaming of their lasses.tell _em it's the resurrection; they must kiss their last, and cometo judgment. that's the way_that's it; thy throat ain't spoiledwith eating amsterdam butter.french sailor. hist, boys! let's have a jig or two before we ride toanchor in blanket bay. what say ye? there comes the other watch. standby all legs! pip! little pip! hurrah with your tambourine!pip. (sulky and sleepy) don't know where it is.french sailor. beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears. jig it, men, isay; merry's the word; hurrah! damn me, won't you dance? form, now,indian-file, and gallop into the double-shuffle? throw yourselves! legs!legs!iceland sailor. i don't like your floor, maty; it's too springy tomy taste. i'm used to ice-floors. i'm sorry to throw cold water onthe subject; but excuse me.maltese sailor. me too; where's your girls? who but a fool would takehis left hand by his right, and say to himself, how d'ye do? partners!i must have partners!sicilian sailor. aye; girls and a green!_then i'll hop with ye; yea,turn grasshopper!long-island sailor. well, well, ye sulkies, there's plenty more ofus. hoe corn when you may, say i. all legs go to harvest soon. ah! herecomes the music; now for it!azore sailor. (ascending, and pitching the tambourine up the scuttle.)here you are, pip; and there's the windlass-bitts; up you mount! now,boys! (the half of them dance to the tambourine; some go below; somesleep or lie among the coils of rigging. oaths a-plenty.)azore sailor. (dancing) go it, pip! bang it, bell-boy! rig it, dig it,stig it, quig it, bell-boy! make fire-flies; break the jinglers!pip. jinglers, you say?_there goes another, dropped off; i pound itso.china sailor. rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda ofthyself.french sailor. merry-mad! hold up thy hoop, pip, till i jump through it!split jibs! tear yourselves!tashtego. (quietly smoking) that's a white man; he calls that fun:humph! i save my sweat.old manx sailor. i wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of whatthey are dancing over. i'll dance over your grave, i will_that'sthe bitterest threat of your night-women, that beat head-winds roundcorners. o christ! to think of the green navies and the green-skulledcrews! well, well; belike the whole world's a ball, as you scholarshave it; and so _tis right to make one ballroom of it. dance on, lads,you're young; i was once.3d nantucket sailor. spell oh!_whew! this is worse than pulling afterwhales in a calm_give us a whiff, tash.(they cease dancing, and gather in clusters. meantime the skydarkens_the wind rises.)lascar sailor. by brahma! boys, it'll be douse sail soon. thesky-born, high-tide ganges turned to wind! thou showest thy black brow,seeva!maltese sailor. (reclining and shaking his cap.) it's the waves_thesnow's caps turn to jig it now. they'll shake their tassels soon.now would all the waves were women, then i'd go drown, and chasseewith them evermore! there's naught so sweet on earth_heaven may notmatch it!_as those swift glances of warm, wild bosoms in the dance,when the over-arboring arms hide such ripe, bursting grapes.sicilian sailor. (reclining.) tell me not of it! hark ye, lad_fleetinterlacings of the limbs_lithe swayings_coyings_flutterings! lip!heart! hip! all graze: unceasing touch and go! not taste, observe ye,else come satiety. eh, pagan? (nudging.)tahitan sailor. (reclining on a mat.) hail, holy nakedness of ourdancing girls!_the heeva-heeva! ah! low veiled, high palmed tahiti! istill rest me on thy mat, but the soft soil has slid! i saw thee wovenin the wood, my mat! green the first day i brought ye thence; now wornand wilted quite. ah me!_not thou nor i can bear the change! howthen, if so be transplanted to yon sky? hear i the roaring streams frompirohitee's peak of spears, when they leap down the crags and drownthe villages?_the blast! the blast! up, spine, and meet it! (leaps tohis feet.)portuguese sailor. how the sea rolls swashing _gainst the side! standby for reefing, hearties! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mellthey'll go lunging presently.danish sailor. crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crackest, thouholdest! well done! the mate there holds ye to it stiffly. he's nomore afraid than the isle fort at cattegat, put there to fight thebaltic with storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!4th nantucket sailor. he has his orders, mind ye that. i heard oldahab tell him he must always kill a squall, something as they burst awaterspout with a pistol_fire your ship right into it!english sailor. blood! but that old man's a grand old cove! we are thelads to hunt him up his whale!all. aye! aye!old manx sailor. how the three pines shake! pines are the hardest sortof tree to live when shifted to any other soil, and here there's nonebut the crew's cursed clay. steady, helmsman! steady. this is the sortof weather when brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at sea.our captain has his birthmark; look yonder, boys, there's another inthe sky_lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black.daggoo. what of that? who's afraid of black's afraid of me! i'mquarried out of it!spanish sailor. (aside.) he wants to bully, ah!_the old grudge makesme touchy (advancing.) aye, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable darkside of mankind_devilish dark at that. no offence.daggoo (grimly). none.st. jago's sailor. that spaniard's mad or drunk. but that can'tbe, or else in his one case our old mogul's fire-waters are somewhatlong in working.5th nantucket sailor. what's that i saw_lightning? yes.spanish sailor. no; daggoo showing his teeth.daggoo (springing). swallow thine, mannikin! white skin, white liver!spanish sailor (meeting him). knife thee heartily! big frame, smallspirit!all. a row! a row! a row!tashtego (with a whiff). a row a'low, and a row aloft_gods andmen_both brawlers! humph!belfast sailor. a row! arrah a row! the virgin be blessed, a row! plungein with ye!english sailor. fair play! snatch the spaniard's knife! a ring, aring!old manx sailor. ready formed. there! the ringed horizon. in that ringcain struck abel. sweet work, right work! no? why then, god, mad'stthou the ring?mate's voice from the quarter-deck. hands by the halyards! intop-gallant sails! stand by to reef topsails!all. the squall! the squall! jump, my jollies! (they scatter.)pip (shrinking under the windlass). jollies? lord help such jollies!crish, crash! there goes the jib-stay! blang-whang! god! duck lower,pip, here comes the royal yard! it's worse than being in the whirledwoods, the last day of the year! who'd go climbing after chestnutsnow? but there they go, all cursing, and here i don't. fine prospectsto _em; they're on the road to heaven. hold on hard! jimmini, whata squall! but those chaps there are worse yet_they are your whitesqualls, they. white squalls? white whale, shirr! shirr! here have iheard all their chat just now, and the white whale_shirr! shirr!_butspoken of once! and only this evening_it makes me jingle all over likemy tambourine_that anaconda of an old man swore _em in to hunt him!oh, thou big white god aloft there somewhere in yon darkness, have mercyon this small black boy down here; preserve him from all men that haveno bowels to feel fear!chapter 41. moby dick.i, ishmael, was one of that crew; my shouts had gone up with the rest;my oath had been welded with theirs; and stronger i shouted, and moredid i hammer and clinch my oath, because of the dread in my soul. awild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me; ahab's quenchlessfeud seemed mine. with greedy ears i learned the history of thatmurderous monster against whom i and all the others had taken our oathsof violence and revenge.for some time past, though at intervals only, the unaccompanied,secluded white whale had haunted those uncivilized seas mostlyfrequented by the sperm whale fishermen. but not all of them knew of hisexistence; only a few of them, comparatively, had knowingly seen him;while the number who as yet had actually and knowingly given battle tohim, was small indeed. for, owing to the large number of whale-cruisers;the disorderly way they were sprinkled over the entire waterycircumference, many of them adventurously pushing their quest alongsolitary latitudes, so as seldom or never for a whole twelvemonth ormore on a stretch, to encounter a single news-telling sail of any sort;the inordinate length of each separate voyage; the irregularity of thetimes of sailing from home; all these, with other circumstances, directand indirect, long obstructed the spread through the whole world-widewhaling-fleet of the special individualizing tidings concerning mobydick. it was hardly to be doubted, that several vessels reported to haveencountered, at such or such a time, or on such or such a meridian,a sperm whale of uncommon magnitude and malignity, which whale, afterdoing great mischief to his assailants, had completely escaped them; tosome minds it was not an unfair presumption, i say, that the whale inquestion must have been no other than moby dick. yet as of late thesperm whale fishery had been marked by various and not unfrequentinstances of great ferocity, cunning, and malice in the monsterattacked; therefore it was, that those who by accident ignorantly gavebattle to moby dick; such hunters, perhaps, for the most part, werecontent to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred, more, as it were, tothe perils of the sperm whale fishery at large, than to the individualcause. in that way, mostly, the disastrous encounter between ahab andthe whale had hitherto been popularly regarded.and as for those who, previously hearing of the white whale, by chancecaught sight of him; in the beginning of the thing they had every one ofthem, almost, as boldly and fearlessly lowered for him, as for any otherwhale of that species. but at length, such calamities did ensue in theseassaults_not restricted to sprained wrists and ankles, broken limbs,or devouring amputations_but fatal to the last degree of fatality;those repeated disastrous repulses, all accumulating and piling theirterrors upon moby dick; those things had gone far to shake the fortitudeof many brave hunters, to whom the story of the white whale hadeventually come.nor did wild rumors of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and still the morehorrify the true histories of these deadly encounters. for not only dofabulous rumors naturally grow out of the very body of all surprisingterrible events,_as the smitten tree gives birth to its fungi; but, inmaritime life, far more than in that of terra firma, wild rumors abound,wherever there is any adequate reality for them to cling to. and as thesea surpasses the land in this matter, so the whale fishery surpassesevery other sort of maritime life, in the wonderfulness and fearfulnessof the rumors which sometimes circulate there. for not only are whalemenas a body unexempt from that ignorance and superstitiousness hereditaryto all sailors; but of all sailors, they are by all odds the mostdirectly brought into contact with whatever is appallingly astonishingin the sea; face to face they not only eye its greatest marvels, but,hand to jaw, give battle to them. alone, in such remotest waters, thatthough you sailed a thousand miles, and passed a thousand shores, youwould not come to any chiseled hearth-stone, or aught hospitable beneaththat part of the sun; in such latitudes and longitudes, pursuing toosuch a calling as he does, the whaleman is wrapped by influences alltending to make his fancy pregnant with many a mighty birth.no wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the mere transit overthe widest watery spaces, the outblown rumors of the white whale didin the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid hints,and half-formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies, whicheventually invested moby dick with new terrors unborrowed from anythingthat visibly appears. so that in many cases such a panic did he finallystrike, that few who by those rumors, at least, had heard of the whitewhale, few of those hunters were willing to encounter the perils of hisjaw.but there were still other and more vital practical influences at work.not even at the present day has the original prestige of the spermwhale, as fearfully distinguished from all other species of theleviathan, died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body. there arethose this day among them, who, though intelligent and courageousenough in offering battle to the greenland or right whale, wouldperhaps_either from professional inexperience, or incompetency, ortimidity, decline a contest with the sperm whale; at any rate, there areplenty of whalemen, especially among those whaling nations not sailingunder the american flag, who have never hostilely encountered the spermwhale, but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan is restricted tothe ignoble monster primitively pursued in the north; seated on theirhatches, these men will hearken with a childish fireside interestand awe, to the wild, strange tales of southern whaling. nor is thepre-eminent tremendousness of the great sperm whale anywhere morefeelingly comprehended, than on board of those prows which stem him.and as if the now tested reality of his might had in formerlegendary times thrown its shadow before it; we find some booknaturalists_olassen and povelson_declaring the sperm whale not onlyto be a consternation to every other creature in the sea, but also tobe so incredibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human blood.nor even down to so late a time as cuvier's, were these or almostsimilar impressions effaced. for in his natural history, the baronhimself affirms that at sight of the sperm whale, all fish (sharksincluded) are "struck with the most lively terrors," and "often inthe precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against the rockswith such violence as to cause instantaneous death." and however thegeneral experiences in the fishery may amend such reports as these; yetin their full terribleness, even to the bloodthirsty item of povelson,the superstitious belief in them is, in some vicissitudes of theirvocation, revived in the minds of the hunters.so that overawed by the rumors and portents concerning him, not a few ofthe fishermen recalled, in reference to moby dick, the earlier daysof the sperm whale fishery, when it was oftentimes hard to induce longpractised right whalemen to embark in the perils of this new and daringwarfare; such men protesting that although other leviathans might behopefully pursued, yet to chase and point lance at such an apparitionas the sperm whale was not for mortal man. that to attempt it, wouldbe inevitably to be torn into a quick eternity. on this head, there aresome remarkable documents that may be consulted.nevertheless, some there were, who even in the face of these thingswere ready to give chase to moby dick; and a still greater number who,chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely, without thespecific details of any certain calamity, and without superstitiousaccompaniments, were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle ifoffered.one of the wild suggestions referred to, as at last coming to be linkedwith the white whale in the minds of the superstitiously inclined,was the unearthly conceit that moby dick was ubiquitous; that he hadactually been encountered in opposite latitudes at one and the sameinstant of time.nor, credulous as such minds must have been, was this conceit altogetherwithout some faint show of superstitious probability. for as the secretsof the currents in the seas have never yet been divulged, even tothe most erudite research; so the hidden ways of the sperm whalewhen beneath the surface remain, in great part, unaccountable to hispursuers; and from time to time have originated the most curious andcontradictory speculations regarding them, especially concerning themystic modes whereby, after sounding to a great depth, he transportshimself with such vast swiftness to the most widely distant points.it is a thing well known to both american and english whale-ships, andas well a thing placed upon authoritative record years ago by scoresby,that some whales have been captured far north in the pacific, in whosebodies have been found the barbs of harpoons darted in the greenlandseas. nor is it to be gainsaid, that in some of these instances it hasbeen declared that the interval of time between the two assaults couldnot have exceeded very many days. hence, by inference, it has beenbelieved by some whalemen, that the nor' west passage, so long aproblem to man, was never a problem to the whale. so that here, in thereal living experience of living men, the prodigies related in old timesof the inland strello mountain in portugal (near whose top therewas said to be a lake in which the wrecks of ships floated up to thesurface); and that still more wonderful story of the arethusa fountainnear syracuse (whose waters were believed to have come from the holyland by an underground passage); these fabulous narrations are almostfully equalled by the realities of the whalemen.forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as these; and knowingthat after repeated, intrepid assaults, the white whale had escapedalive; it cannot be much matter of surprise that some whalemen shouldgo still further in their superstitions; declaring moby dick not onlyubiquitous, but immortal (for immortality is but ubiquity in time); thatthough groves of spears should be planted in his flanks, he would stillswim away unharmed; or if indeed he should ever be made to spout thickblood, such a sight would be but a ghastly deception; for again inunensanguined billows hundreds of leagues away, his unsullied jet wouldonce more be seen.but even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, there was enough inthe earthly make and incontestable character of the monster to strikethe imagination with unwonted power. for, it was not so much hisuncommon bulk that so much distinguished him from other sperm whales,but, as was elsewhere thrown out_a peculiar snow-white wrinkledforehead, and a high, pyramidical white hump. these were his prominentfeatures; the tokens whereby, even in the limitless, uncharted seas, herevealed his identity, at a long distance, to those who knew him.the rest of his body was so streaked, and spotted, and marbled withthe same shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had gained his distinctiveappellation of the white whale; a name, indeed, literally justified byhis vivid aspect, when seen gliding at high noon through a dark bluesea, leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all spangled with goldengleamings.nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his remarkable hue, nor yet hisdeformed lower jaw, that so much invested the whale with natural terror,as that unexampled, intelligent malignity which, according to specificaccounts, he had over and over again evinced in his assaults. more thanall, his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay than perhaps aughtelse. for, when swimming before his exulting pursuers, with everyapparent symptom of alarm, he had several times been known to turnround suddenly, and, bearing down upon them, either stave their boats tosplinters, or drive them back in consternation to their ship.already several fatalities had attended his chase. but though similardisasters, however little bruited ashore, were by no means unusual inthe fishery; yet, in most instances, such seemed the white whale'sinfernal aforethought of ferocity, that every dismembering or deaththat he caused, was not wholly regarded as having been inflicted by anunintelligent agent.judge, then, to what pitches of inflamed, distracted fury the minds ofhis more desperate hunters were impelled, when amid the chips of chewedboats, and the sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam out of thewhite curds of the whale's direful wrath into the serene, exasperatingsunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal.his three boats stove around him, and oars and men both whirling in theeddies; one captain, seizing the line-knife from his broken prow, haddashed at the whale, as an arkansas duellist at his foe, blindly seekingwith a six inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of the whale.that captain was ahab. and then it was, that suddenly sweeping hissickle-shaped lower jaw beneath him, moby dick had reaped away ahab'sleg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field. no turbaned turk, nohired venetian or malay, could have smote him with more seeming malice.small reason was there to doubt, then, that ever since that almost fatalencounter, ahab had cherished a wild vindictiveness against the whale,all the more fell for that in his frantic morbidness he at last cameto identify with him, not only all his bodily woes, but all hisintellectual and spiritual exasperations. the white whale swam beforehim as the monomaniac incarnation of all those malicious agencies whichsome deep men feel eating in them, till they are left living on withhalf a heart and half a lung. that intangible malignity which has beenfrom the beginning; to whose dominion even the modern christians ascribeone-half of the worlds; which the ancient ophites of the east reverencedin their statue devil;_ahab did not fall down and worship it likethem; but deliriously transferring its idea to the abhorred white whale,he pitted himself, all mutilated, against it. all that most maddens andtorments; all that stirs up the lees of things; all truth with malicein it; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the brain; all the subtledemonisms of life and thought; all evil, to crazy ahab, were visiblypersonified, and made practically assailable in moby dick. he piled uponthe whale's white hump the sum of all the general rage and hate feltby his whole race from adam down; and then, as if his chest had been amortar, he burst his hot heart's shell upon it.it is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant rise atthe precise time of his bodily dismemberment. then, in darting at themonster, knife in hand, he had but given loose to a sudden, passionate,corporal animosity; and when he received the stroke that tore him, heprobably but felt the agonizing bodily laceration, but nothing more.yet, when by this collision forced to turn towards home, and for longmonths of days and weeks, ahab and anguish lay stretched together in onehammock, rounding in mid winter that dreary, howling patagonian cape;then it was, that his torn body and gashed soul bled into one another;and so interfusing, made him mad. that it was only then, on the homewardvoyage, after the encounter, that the final monomania seized him, seemsall but certain from the fact that, at intervals during the passage,he was a raving lunatic; and, though unlimbed of a leg, yet such vitalstrength yet lurked in his egyptian chest, and was moreover intensifiedby his delirium, that his mates were forced to lace him fast, eventhere, as he sailed, raving in his hammock. in a strait-jacket, he swungto the mad rockings of the gales. and, when running into more sufferablelatitudes, the ship, with mild stun'sails spread, floated across thetranquil tropics, and, to all appearances, the old man's deliriumseemed left behind him with the cape horn swells, and he came forth fromhis dark den into the blessed light and air; even then, when he borethat firm, collected front, however pale, and issued his calm ordersonce again; and his mates thanked god the direful madness was nowgone; even then, ahab, in his hidden self, raved on. human madness isoftentimes a cunning and most feline thing. when you think it fled, itmay have but become transfigured into some still subtler form. ahab'sfull lunacy subsided not, but deepeningly contracted; like the unabatedhudson, when that noble northman flows narrowly, but unfathomablythrough the highland gorge. but, as in his narrow-flowing monomania, notone jot of ahab's broad madness had been left behind; so in that broadmadness, not one jot of his great natural intellect had perished. thatbefore living agent, now became the living instrument. if such a furioustrope may stand, his special lunacy stormed his general sanity, andcarried it, and turned all its concentred cannon upon its own mad mark;so that far from having lost his strength, ahab, to that one end, didnow possess a thousand fold more potency than ever he had sanely broughtto bear upon any one reasonable object.this is much; yet ahab's larger, darker, deeper part remains unhinted.but vain to popularize profundities, and all truth is profound. windingfar down from within the very heart of this spiked hotel de cluny wherewe here stand_however grand and wonderful, now quit it;_and takeyour way, ye nobler, sadder souls, to those vast roman halls of thermes;where far beneath the fantastic towers of man's upper earth, his rootof grandeur, his whole awful essence sits in bearded state; an antiqueburied beneath antiquities, and throned on torsoes! so with a brokenthrone, the great gods mock that captive king; so like a caryatid, hepatient sits, upholding on his frozen brow the piled entablatures ofages. wind ye down there, ye prouder, sadder souls! question that proud,sad king! a family likeness! aye, he did beget ye, ye young exiledroyalties; and from your grim sire only will the old state-secret come.now, in his heart, ahab had some glimpse of this, namely: all my meansare sane, my motive and my object mad. yet without power to kill, orchange, or shun the fact; he likewise knew that to mankind he did longdissemble; in some sort, did still. but that thing of his dissemblingwas only subject to his perceptibility, not to his will determinate.nevertheless, so well did he succeed in that dissembling, that whenwith ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, no nantucketer thought himotherwise than but naturally grieved, and that to the quick, with theterrible casualty which had overtaken him.the report of his undeniable delirium at sea was likewise popularlyascribed to a kindred cause. and so too, all the added moodiness whichalways afterwards, to the very day of sailing in the pequod on thepresent voyage, sat brooding on his brow. nor is it so very unlikely,that far from distrusting his fitness for another whaling voyage, onaccount of such dark symptoms, the calculating people of that prudentisle were inclined to harbor the conceit, that for those very reasons hewas all the better qualified and set on edge, for a pursuit so fullof rage and wildness as the bloody hunt of whales. gnawed within andscorched without, with the infixed, unrelenting fangs of some incurableidea; such an one, could he be found, would seem the very man to darthis iron and lift his lance against the most appalling of all brutes.or, if for any reason thought to be corporeally incapacitated for that,yet such an one would seem superlatively competent to cheer and howl onhis underlings to the attack. but be all this as it may, certain it is,that with the mad secret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed inhim, ahab had purposely sailed upon the present voyage with the one onlyand all-engrossing object of hunting the white whale. had any one of hisold acquaintances on shore but half dreamed of what was lurking in himthen, how soon would their aghast and righteous souls have wrenched theship from such a fiendish man! they were bent on profitable cruises, theprofit to be counted down in dollars from the mint. he was intent on anaudacious, immitigable, and supernatural revenge.here, then, was this grey-headed, ungodly old man, chasing with curses ajob's whale round the world, at the head of a crew, too, chieflymade up of mongrel renegades, and castaways, and cannibals_morallyenfeebled also, by the incompetence of mere unaided virtue orright-mindedness in starbuck, the invulnerable jollity of indifferenceand recklessness in stubb, and the pervading mediocrity in flask. such acrew, so officered, seemed specially picked and packed by some infernalfatality to help him to his monomaniac revenge. how it was that they soaboundingly responded to the old man's ire_by what evil magic theirsouls were possessed, that at times his hate seemed almost theirs; thewhite whale as much their insufferable foe as his; how all this cameto be_what the white whale was to them, or how to their unconsciousunderstandings, also, in some dim, unsuspected way, he might have seemedthe gliding great demon of the seas of life,_all this to explain,would be to dive deeper than ishmael can go. the subterranean miner thatworks in us all, how can one tell whither leads his shaft by the evershifting, muffled sound of his pick? who does not feel the irresistiblearm drag? what skiff in tow of a seventy-four can stand still? for one,i gave myself up to the abandonment of the time and the place; but whileyet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could see naught in that brutebut the deadliest ill.chapter 42. the whiteness of the whale.what the white whale was to ahab, has been hinted; what, at times, hewas to me, as yet remains unsaid.aside from those more obvious considerations touching moby dick, whichcould not but occasionally awaken in any man's soul some alarm, therewas another thought, or rather vague, nameless horror concerning him,which at times by its intensity completely overpowered all the rest; andyet so mystical and well nigh ineffable was it, that i almost despair ofputting it in a comprehensible form. it was the whiteness of the whalethat above all things appalled me. but how can i hope to explain myselfhere; and yet, in some dim, random way, explain myself i must, else allthese chapters might be naught.though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly enhances beauty, asif imparting some special virtue of its own, as in marbles, japonicas,and pearls; and though various nations have in some way recognised acertain royal preeminence in this hue; even the barbaric, grand oldkings of pegu placing the title "lord of the white elephants" aboveall their other magniloquent ascriptions of dominion; and the modernkings of siam unfurling the same snow-white quadruped in the royalstandard; and the hanoverian flag bearing the one figure of a snow-whitecharger; and the great austrian empire, caesarian, heir to overlordingrome, having for the imperial colour the same imperial hue; and thoughthis pre-eminence in it applies to the human race itself, giving thewhite man ideal mastership over every dusky tribe; and though, besides,all this, whiteness has been even made significant of gladness, foramong the romans a white stone marked a joyful day; and though in othermortal sympathies and symbolizings, this same hue is made the emblem ofmany touching, noble things_the innocence of brides, the benignity ofage; though among the red men of america the giving of the white beltof wampum was the deepest pledge of honour; though in many climes,whiteness typifies the majesty of justice in the ermine of the judge,and contributes to the daily state of kings and queens drawn bymilk-white steeds; though even in the higher mysteries of the mostaugust religions it has been made the symbol of the divine spotlessnessand power; by the persian fire worshippers, the white forked flame beingheld the holiest on the altar; and in the greek mythologies, great jovehimself being made incarnate in a snow-white bull; and though to thenoble iroquois, the midwinter sacrifice of the sacred white dog wasby far the holiest festival of their theology, that spotless, faithfulcreature being held the purest envoy they could send to the great spiritwith the annual tidings of their own fidelity; and though directly fromthe latin word for white, all christian priests derive the name ofone part of their sacred vesture, the alb or tunic, worn beneath thecassock; and though among the holy pomps of the romish faith, white isspecially employed in the celebration of the passion of our lord; thoughin the vision of st. john, white robes are given to the redeemed, andthe four-and-twenty elders stand clothed in white before the great-whitethrone, and the holy one that sitteth there white like wool; yet for allthese accumulated associations, with whatever is sweet, and honourable,and sublime, there yet lurks an elusive something in the innermost ideaof this hue, which strikes more of panic to the soul than that rednesswhich affrights in blood.this elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of whiteness, whendivorced from more kindly associations, and coupled with any objectterrible in itself, to heighten that terror to the furthest bounds.witness the white bear of the poles, and the white shark of the tropics;what but their smooth, flaky whiteness makes them the transcendenthorrors they are? that ghastly whiteness it is which imparts such anabhorrent mildness, even more loathsome than terrific, to the dumbgloating of their aspect. so that not the fierce-fanged tiger in hisheraldic coat can so stagger courage as the white-shrouded bear orshark.**with reference to the polar bear, it may possibly be urged by himwho would fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is notthe whiteness, separately regarded, which heightens the intolerablehideousness of that brute; for, analysed, that heightened hideousness,it might be said, only rises from the circumstance, that theirresponsible ferociousness of the creature stands invested in thefleece of celestial innocence and love; and hence, by bringing togethertwo such opposite emotions in our minds, the polar bear frightens uswith so unnatural a contrast. but even assuming all this to be true;yet, were it not for the whiteness, you would not have that intensifiedterror.as for the white shark, the white gliding ghostliness of repose in thatcreature, when beheld in his ordinary moods, strangely tallies with thesame quality in the polar quadruped. this peculiarity is most vividlyhit by the french in the name they bestow upon that fish. the romishmass for the dead begins with "requiem eternam" (eternal rest),whence requiem denominating the mass itself, and any other funeralmusic. now, in allusion to the white, silent stillness of death inthis shark, and the mild deadliness of his habits, the french call himrequin.bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those clouds of spiritualwonderment and pale dread, in which that white phantom sails in allimaginations? not coleridge first threw that spell; but god's great,unflattering laureate, nature.**i remember the first albatross i ever saw. it was during a prolongedgale, in waters hard upon the antarctic seas. from my forenoon watchbelow, i ascended to the overclouded deck; and there, dashed upon themain hatches, i saw a regal, feathery thing of unspotted whiteness, andwith a hooked, roman bill sublime. at intervals, it arched forthits vast archangel wings, as if to embrace some holy ark. wondrousflutterings and throbbings shook it. though bodily unharmed, it utteredcries, as some king's ghost in supernatural distress. through itsinexpressible, strange eyes, methought i peeped to secrets which tookhold of god. as abraham before the angels, i bowed myself; the whitething was so white, its wings so wide, and in those for ever exiledwaters, i had lost the miserable warping memories of traditions and oftowns. long i gazed at that prodigy of plumage. i cannot tell, can onlyhint, the things that darted through me then. but at last i awoke; andturning, asked a sailor what bird was this. a goney, he replied. goney!never had heard that name before; is it conceivable that this gloriousthing is utterly unknown to men ashore! never! but some time after, ilearned that goney was some seaman's name for albatross. so that byno possibility could coleridge's wild rhyme have had aught to do withthose mystical impressions which were mine, when i saw that bird uponour deck. for neither had i then read the rhyme, nor knew the bird to bean albatross. yet, in saying this, i do but indirectly burnish a littlebrighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet.i assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the birdchiefly lurks the secret of the spell; a truth the more evinced in this,that by a solecism of terms there are birds called grey albatrosses;and these i have frequently seen, but never with such emotions as when ibeheld the antarctic fowl.but how had the mystic thing been caught? whisper it not, and i willtell; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl floated on the sea.at last the captain made a postman of it; tying a lettered, leatherntally round its neck, with the ship's time and place; and then lettingit escape. but i doubt not, that leathern tally, meant for man, wastaken off in heaven, when the white fowl flew to join the wing-folding,the invoking, and adoring cherubim!most famous in our western annals and indian traditions is that ofthe white steed of the prairies; a magnificent milk-white charger,large-eyed, small-headed, bluff-chested, and with the dignity of athousand monarchs in his lofty, overscorning carriage. he was theelected xerxes of vast herds of wild horses, whose pastures in thosedays were only fenced by the rocky mountains and the alleghanies. attheir flaming head he westward trooped it like that chosen star whichevery evening leads on the hosts of light. the flashing cascade of hismane, the curving comet of his tail, invested him with housings moreresplendent than gold and silver-beaters could have furnished him. amost imperial and archangelical apparition of that unfallen, westernworld, which to the eyes of the old trappers and hunters revived theglories of those primeval times when adam walked majestic as a god,bluff-browed and fearless as this mighty steed. whether marching amidhis aides and marshals in the van of countless cohorts that endlesslystreamed it over the plains, like an ohio; or whether with hiscircumambient subjects browsing all around at the horizon, the whitesteed gallopingly reviewed them with warm nostrils reddening through hiscool milkiness; in whatever aspect he presented himself, always to thebravest indians he was the object of trembling reverence and awe. norcan it be questioned from what stands on legendary record of this noblehorse, that it was his spiritual whiteness chiefly, which so clothed himwith divineness; and that this divineness had that in it which, thoughcommanding worship, at the same time enforced a certain nameless terror.but there are other instances where this whiteness loses all thataccessory and strange glory which invests it in the white steed andalbatross.what is it that in the albino man so peculiarly repels and often shocksthe eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and kin! itis that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed by the name hebears. the albino is as well made as other men_has no substantivedeformity_and yet this mere aspect of all-pervading whiteness makeshim more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion. why should this beso?nor, in quite other aspects, does nature in her least palpable butnot the less malicious agencies, fail to enlist among her forcesthis crowning attribute of the terrible. from its snowy aspect, thegauntleted ghost of the southern seas has been denominated the whitesquall. nor, in some historic instances, has the art of human maliceomitted so potent an auxiliary. how wildly it heightens the effect ofthat passage in froissart, when, masked in the snowy symbol of theirfaction, the desperate white hoods of ghent murder their bailiff in themarket-place!nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary experience of allmankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this hue. itcannot well be doubted, that the one visible quality in the aspect ofthe dead which most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor lingeringthere; as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge ofconsternation in the other world, as of mortal trepidation here. andfrom that pallor of the dead, we borrow the expressive hue of the shroudin which we wrap them. nor even in our superstitions do we fail tothrow the same snowy mantle round our phantoms; all ghosts rising ina milk-white fog_yea, while these terrors seize us, let us add, thateven the king of terrors, when personified by the evangelist, rides onhis pallid horse.therefore, in his other moods, symbolize whatever grand or graciousthing he will by whiteness, no man can deny that in its profoundestidealized significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul.but though without dissent this point be fixed, how is mortal man toaccount for it? to analyse it, would seem impossible. can we, then,by the citation of some of those instances wherein this thing ofwhiteness_though for the time either wholly or in great part strippedof all direct associations calculated to impart to it aught fearful,but nevertheless, is found to exert over us the same sorcery, howevermodified;_can we thus hope to light upon some chance clue to conductus to the hidden cause we seek?let us try. but in a matter like this, subtlety appeals to subtlety,and without imagination no man can follow another into these halls. andthough, doubtless, some at least of the imaginative impressions aboutto be presented may have been shared by most men, yet few perhaps wereentirely conscious of them at the time, and therefore may not be able torecall them now.why to the man of untutored ideality, who happens to be but looselyacquainted with the peculiar character of the day, does the bare mentionof whitsuntide marshal in the fancy such long, dreary, speechlessprocessions of slow-pacing pilgrims, down-cast and hooded withnew-fallen snow? or, to the unread, unsophisticated protestant of themiddle american states, why does the passing mention of a white friar ora white nun, evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul?or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors andkings (which will not wholly account for it) that makes the whitetower of london tell so much more strongly on the imagination ofan untravelled american, than those other storied structures, itsneighbors_the byward tower, or even the bloody? and those sublimertowers, the white mountains of new hampshire, whence, in peculiar moods,comes that gigantic ghostliness over the soul at the bare mention ofthat name, while the thought of virginia's blue ridge is full of asoft, dewy, distant dreaminess? or why, irrespective of all latitudesand longitudes, does the name of the white sea exert such a spectralnessover the fancy, while that of the yellow sea lulls us with mortalthoughts of long lacquered mild afternoons on the waves, followed bythe gaudiest and yet sleepiest of sunsets? or, to choose a whollyunsubstantial instance, purely addressed to the fancy, why, in readingthe old fairy tales of central europe, does "the tall pale man" ofthe hartz forests, whose changeless pallor unrustlingly glides throughthe green of the groves_why is this phantom more terrible than all thewhooping imps of the blocksburg?nor is it, altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral-topplingearthquakes; nor the stampedoes of her frantic seas; nor thetearlessness of arid skies that never rain; nor the sight of her widefield of leaning spires, wrenched cope-stones, and crosses all adroop(like canted yards of anchored fleets); and her suburban avenues ofhouse-walls lying over upon each other, as a tossed pack of cards;_itis not these things alone which make tearless lima, the strangest,saddest city thou can'st see. for lima has taken the white veil; andthere is a higher horror in this whiteness of her woe. old as pizarro,this whiteness keeps her ruins for ever new; admits not the cheerfulgreenness of complete decay; spreads over her broken ramparts the rigidpallor of an apoplexy that fixes its own distortions.i know that, to the common apprehension, this phenomenon of whitenessis not confessed to be the prime agent in exaggerating the terror ofobjects otherwise terrible; nor to the unimaginative mind is there aughtof terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another mind almostsolely consists in this one phenomenon, especially when exhibited underany form at all approaching to muteness or universality. what i meanby these two statements may perhaps be respectively elucidated by thefollowing examples.first: the mariner, when drawing nigh the coasts of foreign lands, if bynight he hear the roar of breakers, starts to vigilance, and feels justenough of trepidation to sharpen all his faculties; but under preciselysimilar circumstances, let him be called from his hammock to view hisship sailing through a midnight sea of milky whiteness_as if fromencircling headlands shoals of combed white bears were swimming roundhim, then he feels a silent, superstitious dread; the shrouded phantomof the whitened waters is horrible to him as a real ghost; in vain thelead assures him he is still off soundings; heart and helm they both godown; he never rests till blue water is under him again. yet where isthe mariner who will tell thee, "sir, it was not so much the fear ofstriking hidden rocks, as the fear of that hideous whiteness that sostirred me?"second: to the native indian of peru, the continual sight of thesnowhowdahed andes conveys naught of dread, except, perhaps, in themere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning at such vastaltitudes, and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness it would beto lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes. much the same is it with thebackwoodsman of the west, who with comparative indifference views anunbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow, no shadow of tree or twigto break the fixed trance of whiteness. not so the sailor, beholding thescenery of the antarctic seas; where at times, by some infernal trickof legerdemain in the powers of frost and air, he, shivering and halfshipwrecked, instead of rainbows speaking hope and solace to his misery,views what seems a boundless churchyard grinning upon him with its leanice monuments and splintered crosses.but thou sayest, methinks that white-lead chapter about whiteness is buta white flag hung out from a craven soul; thou surrenderest to a hypo,ishmael.tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some peaceful valley ofvermont, far removed from all beasts of prey_why is it that upon thesunniest day, if you but shake a fresh buffalo robe behind him, so thathe cannot even see it, but only smells its wild animal muskiness_whywill he start, snort, and with bursting eyes paw the ground in phrensiesof affright? there is no remembrance in him of any gorings of wildcreatures in his green northern home, so that the strange muskiness hesmells cannot recall to him anything associated with the experience offormer perils; for what knows he, this new england colt, of the blackbisons of distant oregon?no; but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute, the instinct of theknowledge of the demonism in the world. though thousands of miles fromoregon, still when he smells that savage musk, the rending, goring bisonherds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of the prairies, whichthis instant they may be trampling into dust.thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea; the bleak rustlingsof the festooned frosts of mountains; the desolate shiftings of thewindrowed snows of prairies; all these, to ishmael, are as the shakingof that buffalo robe to the frightened colt!though neither knows where lie the nameless things of which the mysticsign gives forth such hints; yet with me, as with the colt, somewherethose things must exist. though in many of its aspects this visibleworld seems formed in love, the invisible spheres were formed in fright.but not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness, andlearned why it appeals with such power to the soul; and more strangeand far more portentous_why, as we have seen, it is at once themost meaning symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of thechristian's deity; and yet should be as it is, the intensifying agentin things the most appalling to mankind.is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voidsand immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from behind with thethought of annihilation, when beholding the white depths of the milkyway? or is it, that as in essence whiteness is not so much a colour asthe visible absence of colour; and at the same time the concrete of allcolours; is it for these reasons that there is such a dumb blankness,full of meaning, in a wide landscape of snows_a colourless, all-colourof atheism from which we shrink? and when we consider that other theoryof the natural philosophers, that all other earthly hues_every statelyor lovely emblazoning_the sweet tinges of sunset skies and woods; yea,and the gilded velvets of butterflies, and the butterfly cheeks ofyoung girls; all these are but subtile deceits, not actually inherentin substances, but only laid on from without; so that all deified natureabsolutely paints like the harlot, whose allurements cover nothing butthe charnel-house within; and when we proceed further, and consider thatthe mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her hues, the greatprinciple of light, for ever remains white or colourless in itself, andif operating without medium upon matter, would touch all objects, eventulips and roses, with its own blank tinge_pondering all this, thepalsied universe lies before us a leper; and like wilful travellers inlapland, who refuse to wear coloured and colouring glasses upon theireyes, so the wretched infidel gazes himself blind at the monumentalwhite shroud that wraps all the prospect around him. and of all thesethings the albino whale was the symbol. wonder ye then at the fieryhunt?chapter 43. hark!"hist! did you hear that noise, cabaco?"it was the middle-watch; a fair moonlight; the seamen were standing in acordon, extending from one of the fresh-water butts in the waist, to thescuttle-butt near the taffrail. in this manner, they passed the bucketsto fill the scuttle-butt. standing, for the most part, on the hallowedprecincts of the quarter-deck, they were careful not to speak or rustletheir feet. from hand to hand, the buckets went in the deepest silence,only broken by the occasional flap of a sail, and the steady hum of theunceasingly advancing keel.it was in the midst of this repose, that archy, one of the cordon, whosepost was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neighbor, a cholo, thewords above."hist! did you hear that noise, cabaco?""take the bucket, will ye, archy? what noise d'ye mean?""there it is again_under the hatches_don't you hear it_acough_it sounded like a cough.""cough be damned! pass along that return bucket.""there again_there it is!_it sounds like two or three sleepersturning over, now!""caramba! have done, shipmate, will ye? it's the three soakedbiscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye_nothing else.look to the bucket!""say what ye will, shipmate; i've sharp ears.""aye, you are the chap, ain't ye, that heard the hum of the oldquakeress's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from nantucket;you're the chap.""grin away; we'll see what turns up. hark ye, cabaco, there issomebody down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck; andi suspect our old mogul knows something of it too. i heard stubb tellflask, one morning watch, that there was something of that sort in thewind.""tish! the bucket!"chapter 44. the chart.had you followed captain ahab down into his cabin after the squall thattook place on the night succeeding that wild ratification of his purposewith his crew, you would have seen him go to a locker in the transom,and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish sea charts, spreadthem before him on his screwed-down table. then seating himself beforeit, you would have seen him intently study the various lines andshadings which there met his eye; and with slow but steady pencil traceadditional courses over spaces that before were blank. at intervals, hewould refer to piles of old log-books beside him, wherein were set downthe seasons and places in which, on various former voyages of variousships, sperm whales had been captured or seen.while thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains over hishead, continually rocked with the motion of the ship, and for ever threwshifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkled brow, till italmost seemed that while he himself was marking out lines and courseson the wrinkled charts, some invisible pencil was also tracing lines andcourses upon the deeply marked chart of his forehead.but it was not this night in particular that, in the solitude of hiscabin, ahab thus pondered over his charts. almost every night they werebrought out; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced, andothers were substituted. for with the charts of all four oceans beforehim, ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies, with a view tothe more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul.now, to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans,it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitarycreature in the unhooped oceans of this planet. but not so did itseem to ahab, who knew the sets of all tides and currents; and therebycalculating the driftings of the sperm whale's food; and, also,calling to mind the regular, ascertained seasons for hunting him inparticular latitudes; could arrive at reasonable surmises, almostapproaching to certainties, concerning the timeliest day to be upon thisor that ground in search of his prey.so assured, indeed, is the fact concerning the periodicalness of thesperm whale's resorting to given waters, that many hunters believethat, could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world;were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefullycollated, then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found tocorrespond in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or theflights of swallows. on this hint, attempts have been made to constructelaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale.* *since the above was written, the statement is happily borne out by an official circular, issued by lieutenant maury, of the national observatory, washington, april 16th, 1851. by that circular, it appears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion; and portions of it are presented in the circular. "this chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degrees of longitude; perpendicularly through each of which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months; and horizontally through each of which districts are three lines; one to show the number of days that have been spent in each month in every district, and the two others to show the number of days in which whales, sperm or right, have been seen."besides, when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another, thesperm whales, guided by some infallible instinct_say, rather, secretintelligence from the deity_mostly swim in veins, as they are called;continuing their way along a given ocean-line with such undeviatingexactitude, that no ship ever sailed her course, by any chart, withone tithe of such marvellous precision. though, in these cases, thedirection taken by any one whale be straight as a surveyor'sparallel, and though the line of advance be strictly confined to itsown unavoidable, straight wake, yet the arbitrary vein in which at thesetimes he is said to swim, generally embraces some few miles in width(more or less, as the vein is presumed to expand or contract); butnever exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship's mast-heads,when circumspectly gliding along this magic zone. the sum is, that atparticular seasons within that breadth and along that path, migratingwhales may with great confidence be looked for.and hence not only at substantiated times, upon well known separatefeeding-grounds, could ahab hope to encounter his prey; but in crossingthe widest expanses of water between those grounds he could, by hisart, so place and time himself on his way, as even then not to be whollywithout prospect of a meeting.there was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle hisdelirious but still methodical scheme. but not so in the reality,perhaps. though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular seasonsfor particular grounds, yet in general you cannot conclude that theherds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year,say, will turn out to be identically the same with those that were foundthere the preceding season; though there are peculiar and unquestionableinstances where the contrary of this has proved true. in general, thesame remark, only within a less wide limit, applies to the solitariesand hermits among the matured, aged sperm whales. so that though mobydick had in a former year been seen, for example, on what is called theseychelle ground in the indian ocean, or volcano bay on the japanesecoast; yet it did not follow, that were the pequod to visit either ofthose spots at any subsequent corresponding season, she would infalliblyencounter him there. so, too, with some other feeding grounds, wherehe had at times revealed himself. but all these seemed only his casualstopping-places and ocean-inns, so to speak, not his places of prolongedabode. and where ahab's chances of accomplishing his object havehitherto been spoken of, allusion has only been made to whateverway-side, antecedent, extra prospects were his, ere a particularset time or place were attained, when all possibilities would becomeprobabilities, and, as ahab fondly thought, every possibility the nextthing to a certainty. that particular set time and place were conjoinedin the one technical phrase_the season-on-the-line. for there andthen, for several consecutive years, moby dick had been periodicallydescried, lingering in those waters for awhile, as the sun, in itsannual round, loiters for a predicted interval in any one sign of thezodiac. there it was, too, that most of the deadly encounters withthe white whale had taken place; there the waves were storied with hisdeeds; there also was that tragic spot where the monomaniac old manhad found the awful motive to his vengeance. but in the cautiouscomprehensiveness and unloitering vigilance with which ahab threw hisbrooding soul into this unfaltering hunt, he would not permit himself torest all his hopes upon the one crowning fact above mentioned, howeverflattering it might be to those hopes; nor in the sleeplessness ofhis vow could he so tranquillize his unquiet heart as to postpone allintervening quest.now, the pequod had sailed from nantucket at the very beginning of theseason-on-the-line. no possible endeavor then could enable her commanderto make the great passage southwards, double cape horn, and then runningdown sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorial pacific in timeto cruise there. therefore, he must wait for the next ensuing season.yet the premature hour of the pequod's sailing had, perhaps, beencorrectly selected by ahab, with a view to this very complexion ofthings. because, an interval of three hundred and sixty-five daysand nights was before him; an interval which, instead of impatientlyenduring ashore, he would spend in a miscellaneous hunt; if by chancethe white whale, spending his vacation in seas far remote from hisperiodical feeding-grounds, should turn up his wrinkled brow off thepersian gulf, or in the bengal bay, or china seas, or in any otherwaters haunted by his race. so that monsoons, pampas, nor'-westers,harmattans, trades; any wind but the levanter and simoon, might blowmoby dick into the devious zig-zag world-circle of the pequod'scircumnavigating wake.but granting all this; yet, regarded discreetly and coolly, seems it notbut a mad idea, this; that in the broad boundless ocean, one solitarywhale, even if encountered, should be thought capable of individualrecognition from his hunter, even as a white-bearded mufti in thethronged thoroughfares of constantinople? yes. for the peculiarsnow-white brow of moby dick, and his snow-white hump, could not butbe unmistakable. and have i not tallied the whale, ahab would mutterto himself, as after poring over his charts till long after midnight hewould throw himself back in reveries_tallied him, and shall he escape?his broad fins are bored, and scalloped out like a lost sheep'sear! and here, his mad mind would run on in a breathless race; till aweariness and faintness of pondering came over him; and in the open airof the deck he would seek to recover his strength. ah, god! what trancesof torments does that man endure who is consumed with one unachievedrevengeful desire. he sleeps with clenched hands; and wakes with his ownbloody nails in his palms.often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting and intolerably vividdreams of the night, which, resuming his own intense thoughts throughthe day, carried them on amid a clashing of phrensies, and whirled themround and round and round in his blazing brain, till the very throbbingof his life-spot became insufferable anguish; and when, as was sometimesthe case, these spiritual throes in him heaved his being up from itsbase, and a chasm seemed opening in him, from which forked flames andlightnings shot up, and accursed fiends beckoned him to leap down amongthem; when this hell in himself yawned beneath him, a wild cry would beheard through the ship; and with glaring eyes ahab would burst from hisstate room, as though escaping from a bed that was on fire. yet these,perhaps, instead of being the unsuppressable symptoms of some latentweakness, or fright at his own resolve, were but the plainest tokensof its intensity. for, at such times, crazy ahab, the scheming,unappeasedly steadfast hunter of the white whale; this ahab that hadgone to his hammock, was not the agent that so caused him to burst fromit in horror again. the latter was the eternal, living principle orsoul in him; and in sleep, being for the time dissociated from thecharacterizing mind, which at other times employed it for its outervehicle or agent, it spontaneously sought escape from the scorchingcontiguity of the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it was nolonger an integral. but as the mind does not exist unless leagued withthe soul, therefore it must have been that, in ahab's case, yieldingup all his thoughts and fancies to his one supreme purpose; thatpurpose, by its own sheer inveteracy of will, forced itself against godsand devils into a kind of self-assumed, independent being of its own.nay, could grimly live and burn, while the common vitality to which itwas conjoined, fled horror-stricken from the unbidden and unfatheredbirth. therefore, the tormented spirit that glared out of bodily eyes,when what seemed ahab rushed from his room, was for the time but avacated thing, a formless somnambulistic being, a ray of living light,to be sure, but without an object to colour, and therefore a blanknessin itself. god help thee, old man, thy thoughts have created a creaturein thee; and he whose intense thinking thus makes him a prometheus; avulture feeds upon that heart for ever; that vulture the very creaturehe creates.chapter 45. the affidavit.so far as what there may be of a narrative in this book; and, indeed, asindirectly touching one or two very interesting and curious particularsin the habits of sperm whales, the foregoing chapter, in its earlierpart, is as important a one as will be found in this volume; but theleading matter of it requires to be still further and more familiarlyenlarged upon, in order to be adequately understood, and moreover totake away any incredulity which a profound ignorance of the entiresubject may induce in some minds, as to the natural verity of the mainpoints of this affair.i care not to perform this part of my task methodically; but shallbe content to produce the desired impression by separate citations ofitems, practically or reliably known to me as a whaleman; and from thesecitations, i take it_the conclusion aimed at will naturally follow ofitself.first: i have personally known three instances where a whale, afterreceiving a harpoon, has effected a complete escape; and, after aninterval (in one instance of three years), has been again struck bythe same hand, and slain; when the two irons, both marked by the sameprivate cypher, have been taken from the body. in the instance wherethree years intervened between the flinging of the two harpoons; and ithink it may have been something more than that; the man who dartedthem happening, in the interval, to go in a trading ship on a voyage toafrica, went ashore there, joined a discovery party, and penetrated farinto the interior, where he travelled for a period of nearly two years,often endangered by serpents, savages, tigers, poisonous miasmas,with all the other common perils incident to wandering in the heart ofunknown regions. meanwhile, the whale he had struck must also havebeen on its travels; no doubt it had thrice circumnavigated the globe,brushing with its flanks all the coasts of africa; but to no purpose.this man and this whale again came together, and the one vanquished theother. i say i, myself, have known three instances similar to this; thatis in two of them i saw the whales struck; and, upon the second attack,saw the two irons with the respective marks cut in them, afterwardstaken from the dead fish. in the three-year instance, it so fell outthat i was in the boat both times, first and last, and the last timedistinctly recognised a peculiar sort of huge mole under the whale'seye, which i had observed there three years previous. i say three years,but i am pretty sure it was more than that. here are three instances,then, which i personally know the truth of; but i have heard of manyother instances from persons whose veracity in the matter there is nogood ground to impeach.secondly: it is well known in the sperm whale fishery, however ignorantthe world ashore may be of it, that there have been several memorablehistorical instances where a particular whale in the ocean has been atdistant times and places popularly cognisable. why such a whale becamethus marked was not altogether and originally owing to his bodilypeculiarities as distinguished from other whales; for however peculiarin that respect any chance whale may be, they soon put an end to hispeculiarities by killing him, and boiling him down into a peculiarlyvaluable oil. no: the reason was this: that from the fatal experiencesof the fishery there hung a terrible prestige of perilousness aboutsuch a whale as there did about rinaldo rinaldini, insomuch thatmost fishermen were content to recognise him by merely touching theirtarpaulins when he would be discovered lounging by them on the sea,without seeking to cultivate a more intimate acquaintance. like somepoor devils ashore that happen to know an irascible great man, theymake distant unobtrusive salutations to him in the street, lest if theypursued the acquaintance further, they might receive a summary thump fortheir presumption.but not only did each of these famous whales enjoy great individualcelebrity_nay, you may call it an ocean-wide renown; not only was hefamous in life and now is immortal in forecastle stories after death,but he was admitted into all the rights, privileges, and distinctions ofa name; had as much a name indeed as cambyses or caesar. was it not so,o timor tom! thou famed leviathan, scarred like an iceberg, who so longdid'st lurk in the oriental straits of that name, whose spout was oftseen from the palmy beach of ombay? was it not so, o new zealand jack!thou terror of all cruisers that crossed their wakes in the vicinity ofthe tattoo land? was it not so, o morquan! king of japan, whose loftyjet they say at times assumed the semblance of a snow-white crossagainst the sky? was it not so, o don miguel! thou chilian whale, markedlike an old tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back! in plainprose, here are four whales as well known to the students of cetaceanhistory as marius or sylla to the classic scholar.but this is not all. new zealand tom and don miguel, after at varioustimes creating great havoc among the boats of different vessels, werefinally gone in quest of, systematically hunted out, chased and killedby valiant whaling captains, who heaved up their anchors withthat express object as much in view, as in setting out through thenarragansett woods, captain butler of old had it in his mind to capturethat notorious murderous savage annawon, the headmost warrior of theindian king philip.i do not know where i can find a better place than just here, to makemention of one or two other things, which to me seem important, as inprinted form establishing in all respects the reasonableness of thewhole story of the white whale, more especially the catastrophe. forthis is one of those disheartening instances where truth requires fullas much bolstering as error. so ignorant are most landsmen of some ofthe plainest and most palpable wonders of the world, that withoutsome hints touching the plain facts, historical and otherwise, of thefishery, they might scout at moby dick as a monstrous fable, or stillworse and more detestable, a hideous and intolerable allegory.first: though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the generalperils of the grand fishery, yet they have nothing like a fixed, vividconception of those perils, and the frequency with which they recur.one reason perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actual disasters anddeaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds a public record at home,however transient and immediately forgotten that record. do you supposethat that poor fellow there, who this moment perhaps caught by thewhale-line off the coast of new guinea, is being carried down to thebottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan_do you suppose that thatpoor fellow's name will appear in the newspaper obituary you will readto-morrow at your breakfast? no: because the mails are very irregularbetween here and new guinea. in fact, did you ever hear what might becalled regular news direct or indirect from new guinea? yet i tell youthat upon one particular voyage which i made to the pacific, among manyothers we spoke thirty different ships, every one of which had had adeath by a whale, some of them more than one, and three that had eachlost a boat's crew. for god's sake, be economical with your lampsand candles! not a gallon you burn, but at least one drop of man'sblood was spilled for it.secondly: people ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale isan enormous creature of enormous power; but i have ever found that whennarrating to them some specific example of this two-fold enormousness,they have significantly complimented me upon my facetiousness; when, ideclare upon my soul, i had no more idea of being facetious than moses,when he wrote the history of the plagues of egypt.but fortunately the special point i here seek can be established upontestimony entirely independent of my own. that point is this: the spermwhale is in some cases sufficiently powerful, knowing, and judiciouslymalicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in, utterly destroy, andsink a large ship; and what is more, the sperm whale has done it.first: in the year 1820 the ship essex, captain pollard, of nantucket,was cruising in the pacific ocean. one day she saw spouts, lowered herboats, and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales. ere long, several ofthe whales were wounded; when, suddenly, a very large whale escapingfrom the boats, issued from the shoal, and bore directly down upon theship. dashing his forehead against her hull, he so stove her in, thatin less than "ten minutes" she settled down and fell over. not asurviving plank of her has been seen since. after the severest exposure,part of the crew reached the land in their boats. being returned homeat last, captain pollard once more sailed for the pacific in command ofanother ship, but the gods shipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks andbreakers; for the second time his ship was utterly lost, and forthwithforswearing the sea, he has never tempted it since. at this day captainpollard is a resident of nantucket. i have seen owen chace, who waschief mate of the essex at the time of the tragedy; i have read hisplain and faithful narrative; i have conversed with his son; and allthis within a few miles of the scene of the catastrophe.**the following are extracts from chace's narrative: "every factseemed to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance whichdirected his operations; he made two several attacks upon the ship, ata short interval between them, both of which, according to theirdirection, were calculated to do us the most injury, by being madeahead, and thereby combining the speed of the two objects for the shock;to effect which, the exact manoeuvres which he made were necessary. hisaspect was most horrible, and such as indicated resentment and fury. hecame directly from the shoal which we had just before entered, and inwhich we had struck three of his companions, as if fired withrevenge for their sufferings." again: "at all events, the wholecircumstances taken together, all happening before my own eyes, andproducing, at the time, impressions in my mind of decided, calculatingmischief, on the part of the whale (many of which impressions icannot now recall), induce me to be satisfied that i am correct in myopinion."here are his reflections some time after quitting the ship, during ablack night in an open boat, when almost despairing of reaching anyhospitable shore. "the dark ocean and swelling waters were nothing;the fears of being swallowed up by some dreadful tempest, or dashedupon hidden rocks, with all the other ordinary subjects of fearfulcontemplation, seemed scarcely entitled to a moment's thought; thedismal looking wreck, and the horrid aspect and revenge of the whale,wholly engrossed my reflections, until day again made its appearance."in another place_p. 45,_he speaks of "the mysterious and mortalattack of the animal."secondly: the ship union, also of nantucket, was in the year 1807totally lost off the azores by a similar onset, but the authenticparticulars of this catastrophe i have never chanced to encounter,though from the whale hunters i have now and then heard casual allusionsto it.thirdly: some eighteen or twenty years ago commodore j_-, thencommanding an american sloop-of-war of the first class, happened to bedining with a party of whaling captains, on board a nantucket ship inthe harbor of oahu, sandwich islands. conversation turning upon whales,the commodore was pleased to be sceptical touching the amazing strengthascribed to them by the professional gentlemen present. he peremptorilydenied for example, that any whale could so smite his stout sloop-of-waras to cause her to leak so much as a thimbleful. very good; but thereis more coming. some weeks after, the commodore set sail in thisimpregnable craft for valparaiso. but he was stopped on the way by aportly sperm whale, that begged a few moments' confidential businesswith him. that business consisted in fetching the commodore's craftsuch a thwack, that with all his pumps going he made straight for thenearest port to heave down and repair. i am not superstitious, but iconsider the commodore's interview with that whale as providential.was not saul of tarsus converted from unbelief by a similar fright? itell you, the sperm whale will stand no nonsense.i will now refer you to langsdorff's voyages for a little circumstancein point, peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof. langsdorff,you must know by the way, was attached to the russian admiralkrusenstern's famous discovery expedition in the beginning of thepresent century. captain langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter:"by the thirteenth of may our ship was ready to sail, and the next daywe were out in the open sea, on our way to ochotsh. the weather was veryclear and fine, but so intolerably cold that we were obliged to keep onour fur clothing. for some days we had very little wind; it was nottill the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the northwest sprang up. anuncommon large whale, the body of which was larger than the ship itself,lay almost at the surface of the water, but was not perceived by anyone on board till the moment when the ship, which was in full sail,was almost upon him, so that it was impossible to prevent its strikingagainst him. we were thus placed in the most imminent danger, as thisgigantic creature, setting up its back, raised the ship three feet atleast out of the water. the masts reeled, and the sails fell altogether,while we who were below all sprang instantly upon the deck, concludingthat we had struck upon some rock; instead of this we saw the monstersailing off with the utmost gravity and solemnity. captain d'wolfapplied immediately to the pumps to examine whether or not the vesselhad received any damage from the shock, but we found that very happilyit had escaped entirely uninjured."now, the captain d'wolf here alluded to as commanding the shipin question, is a new englander, who, after a long life of unusualadventures as a sea-captain, this day resides in the village ofdorchester near boston. i have the honour of being a nephew of his. ihave particularly questioned him concerning this passage in langsdorff.he substantiates every word. the ship, however, was by no means a largeone: a russian craft built on the siberian coast, and purchased by myuncle after bartering away the vessel in which he sailed from home.in that up and down manly book of old-fashioned adventure, so full,too, of honest wonders_the voyage of lionel wafer, one of ancientdampier's old chums_i found a little matter set down so like thatjust quoted from langsdorff, that i cannot forbear inserting it here fora corroborative example, if such be needed.lionel, it seems, was on his way to "john ferdinando," as he callsthe modern juan fernandes. "in our way thither," he says, "aboutfour o'clock in the morning, when we were about one hundred and fiftyleagues from the main of america, our ship felt a terrible shock, whichput our men in such consternation that they could hardly tell where theywere or what to think; but every one began to prepare for death. and,indeed, the shock was so sudden and violent, that we took it for grantedthe ship had struck against a rock; but when the amazement was a littleover, we cast the lead, and sounded, but found no ground..... thesuddenness of the shock made the guns leap in their carriages, andseveral of the men were shaken out of their hammocks. captain davis, wholay with his head on a gun, was thrown out of his cabin!" lionel thengoes on to impute the shock to an earthquake, and seems to substantiatethe imputation by stating that a great earthquake, somewhere aboutthat time, did actually do great mischief along the spanish land. buti should not much wonder if, in the darkness of that early hour of themorning, the shock was after all caused by an unseen whale verticallybumping the hull from beneath.i might proceed with several more examples, one way or another known tome, of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale. in morethan one instance, he has been known, not only to chase the assailingboats back to their ships, but to pursue the ship itself, and longwithstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks. the english shippusie hall can tell a story on that head; and, as for his strength,let me say, that there have been examples where the lines attached to arunning sperm whale have, in a calm, been transferred to the ship, andsecured there; the whale towing her great hull through the water, as ahorse walks off with a cart. again, it is very often observed that, ifthe sperm whale, once struck, is allowed time to rally, he then acts,not so often with blind rage, as with wilful, deliberate designs ofdestruction to his pursuers; nor is it without conveying some eloquentindication of his character, that upon being attacked he will frequentlyopen his mouth, and retain it in that dread expansion for severalconsecutive minutes. but i must be content with only one more and aconcluding illustration; a remarkable and most significant one, by whichyou will not fail to see, that not only is the most marvellous event inthis book corroborated by plain facts of the present day, but that thesemarvels (like all marvels) are mere repetitions of the ages; so that forthe millionth time we say amen with solomon_verily there is nothingnew under the sun.in the sixth christian century lived procopius, a christian magistrateof constantinople, in the days when justinian was emperor and belisariusgeneral. as many know, he wrote the history of his own times, a workevery way of uncommon value. by the best authorities, he has always beenconsidered a most trustworthy and unexaggerating historian, except insome one or two particulars, not at all affecting the matter presentlyto be mentioned.now, in this history of his, procopius mentions that, during the termof his prefecture at constantinople, a great sea-monster was capturedin the neighboring propontis, or sea of marmora, after having destroyedvessels at intervals in those waters for a period of more than fiftyyears. a fact thus set down in substantial history cannot easily begainsaid. nor is there any reason it should be. of what precise speciesthis sea-monster was, is not mentioned. but as he destroyed ships, aswell as for other reasons, he must have been a whale; and i am stronglyinclined to think a sperm whale. and i will tell you why. for a longtime i fancied that the sperm whale had been always unknown in themediterranean and the deep waters connecting with it. even now i amcertain that those seas are not, and perhaps never can be, in thepresent constitution of things, a place for his habitual gregariousresort. but further investigations have recently proved to me, that inmodern times there have been isolated instances of the presence of thesperm whale in the mediterranean. i am told, on good authority, thaton the barbary coast, a commodore davis of the british navy foundthe skeleton of a sperm whale. now, as a vessel of war readily passesthrough the dardanelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same route,pass out of the mediterranean into the propontis.in the propontis, as far as i can learn, none of that peculiar substancecalled brit is to be found, the aliment of the right whale. but i haveevery reason to believe that the food of the sperm whale_squid orcuttle-fish_lurks at the bottom of that sea, because large creatures,but by no means the largest of that sort, have been found at itssurface. if, then, you properly put these statements together, andreason upon them a bit, you will clearly perceive that, according toall human reasoning, procopius's sea-monster, that for half a centurystove the ships of a roman emperor, must in all probability have been asperm whale.chapter 46. surmises.though, consumed with the hot fire of his purpose, ahab in all histhoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of moby dick;though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to that onepassion; nevertheless it may have been that he was by nature and longhabituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman's ways, altogether toabandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage. or at least ifthis were otherwise, there were not wanting other motives much moreinfluential with him. it would be refining too much, perhaps, evenconsidering his monomania, to hint that his vindictiveness towards thewhite whale might have possibly extended itself in some degree to allsperm whales, and that the more monsters he slew by so much the more hemultiplied the chances that each subsequently encountered whale wouldprove to be the hated one he hunted. but if such an hypothesis be indeedexceptionable, there were still additional considerations which, thoughnot so strictly according with the wildness of his ruling passion, yetwere by no means incapable of swaying him.to accomplish his object ahab must use tools; and of all tools used inthe shadow of the moon, men are most apt to get out of order. he knew,for example, that however magnetic his ascendency in some respects wasover starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover the complete spiritualman any more than mere corporeal superiority involves intellectualmastership; for to the purely spiritual, the intellectual but stand ina sort of corporeal relation. starbuck's body and starbuck's coercedwill were ahab's, so long as ahab kept his magnet at starbuck'sbrain; still he knew that for all this the chief mate, in hissoul, abhorred his captain's quest, and could he, would joyfullydisintegrate himself from it, or even frustrate it. it might be thata long interval would elapse ere the white whale was seen. during thatlong interval starbuck would ever be apt to fall into open relapsesof rebellion against his captain's leadership, unless some ordinary,prudential, circumstantial influences were brought to bear upon him.not only that, but the subtle insanity of ahab respecting moby dick wasnoways more significantly manifested than in his superlative sense andshrewdness in foreseeing that, for the present, the hunt should in someway be stripped of that strange imaginative impiousness which naturallyinvested it; that the full terror of the voyage must be kept withdrawninto the obscure background (for few men's courage is proof againstprotracted meditation unrelieved by action); that when they stood theirlong night watches, his officers and men must have some nearer things tothink of than moby dick. for however eagerly and impetuously the savagecrew had hailed the announcement of his quest; yet all sailors of allsorts are more or less capricious and unreliable_they live in thevarying outer weather, and they inhale its fickleness_and whenretained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit, howeverpromissory of life and passion in the end, it is above all thingsrequisite that temporary interests and employments should intervene andhold them healthily suspended for the final dash.nor was ahab unmindful of another thing. in times of strong emotionmankind disdain all base considerations; but such times are evanescent.the permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man, thoughtahab, is sordidness. granting that the white whale fully incites thehearts of this my savage crew, and playing round their savageness evenbreeds a certain generous knight-errantism in them, still, while for thelove of it they give chase to moby dick, they must also have foodfor their more common, daily appetites. for even the high lifted andchivalric crusaders of old times were not content to traverse twothousand miles of land to fight for their holy sepulchre, withoutcommitting burglaries, picking pockets, and gaining other piousperquisites by the way. had they been strictly held to their one finaland romantic object_that final and romantic object, too many wouldhave turned from in disgust. i will not strip these men, thought ahab,of all hopes of cash_aye, cash. they may scorn cash now; but let somemonths go by, and no perspective promise of it to them, and then thissame quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them, this same cash wouldsoon cashier ahab.nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more relatedto ahab personally. having impulsively, it is probable, and perhapssomewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of thepequod's voyage, ahab was now entirely conscious that, in so doing,he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge ofusurpation; and with perfect impunity, both moral and legal, his crewif so disposed, and to that end competent, could refuse all furtherobedience to him, and even violently wrest from him the command. fromeven the barely hinted imputation of usurpation, and the possibleconsequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground, ahab mustof course have been most anxious to protect himself. that protectioncould only consist in his own predominating brain and heart and hand,backed by a heedful, closely calculating attention to every minuteatmospheric influence which it was possible for his crew to be subjectedto.for all these reasons then, and others perhaps too analytic to beverbally developed here, ahab plainly saw that he must still in a gooddegree continue true to the natural, nominal purpose of the pequod'svoyage; observe all customary usages; and not only that, but forcehimself to evince all his well known passionate interest in the generalpursuit of his profession.be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard hailing the threemast-heads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out, and not omitreporting even a porpoise. this vigilance was not long without reward.chapter 47. the mat-maker.it was a cloudy, sultry afternoon; the seamen were lazily loungingabout the decks, or vacantly gazing over into the lead-coloured waters.queequeg and i were mildly employed weaving what is called a sword-mat,for an additional lashing to our boat. so still and subdued and yetsomehow preluding was all the scene, and such an incantation of reverielurked in the air, that each silent sailor seemed resolved into his owninvisible self.i was the attendant or page of queequeg, while busy at the mat. as ikept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline betweenthe long yarns of the warp, using my own hand for the shuttle, and asqueequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon slid his heavy oaken swordbetween the threads, and idly looking off upon the water, carelessly andunthinkingly drove home every yarn: i say so strange a dreaminess didthere then reign all over the ship and all over the sea, only broken bythe intermitting dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as if this werethe loom of time, and i myself were a shuttle mechanically weavingand weaving away at the fates. there lay the fixed threads of the warpsubject to but one single, ever returning, unchanging vibration, andthat vibration merely enough to admit of the crosswise interblendingof other threads with its own. this warp seemed necessity; and here,thought i, with my own hand i ply my own shuttle and weave my owndestiny into these unalterable threads. meantime, queequeg'simpulsive, indifferent sword, sometimes hitting the woof slantingly,or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as the case might be; and by thisdifference in the concluding blow producing a corresponding contrast inthe final aspect of the completed fabric; this savage's sword, thoughti, which thus finally shapes and fashions both warp and woof; thiseasy, indifferent sword must be chance_aye, chance, free will, andnecessity_nowise incompatible_all interweavingly working together.the straight warp of necessity, not to be swerved from its ultimatecourse_its every alternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that;free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads; andchance, though restrained in its play within the right lines ofnecessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will, thoughthus prescribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has thelast featuring blow at events.thus we were weaving and weaving away when i started at a sound sostrange, long drawn, and musically wild and unearthly, that the ballof free will dropped from my hand, and i stood gazing up at the cloudswhence that voice dropped like a wing. high aloft in the cross-trees wasthat mad gay-header, tashtego. his body was reaching eagerly forward,his hand stretched out like a wand, and at brief sudden intervals hecontinued his cries. to be sure the same sound was that very momentperhaps being heard all over the seas, from hundreds of whalemen'slook-outs perched as high in the air; but from few of those lungs couldthat accustomed old cry have derived such a marvellous cadence as fromtashtego the indian's.as he stood hovering over you half suspended in air, so wildly andeagerly peering towards the horizon, you would have thought him someprophet or seer beholding the shadows of fate, and by those wild criesannouncing their coming."there she blows! there! there! there! she blows! she blows!""where-away?""on the lee-beam, about two miles off! a school of them!"instantly all was commotion.the sperm whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same undeviating andreliable uniformity. and thereby whalemen distinguish this fish fromother tribes of his genus."there go flukes!" was now the cry from tashtego; and the whalesdisappeared."quick, steward!" cried ahab. "time! time!"dough-boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported the exactminute to ahab.the ship was now kept away from the wind, and she went gently rollingbefore it. tashtego reporting that the whales had gone down heading toleeward, we confidently looked to see them again directly in advance ofour bows. for that singular craft at times evinced by the sperm whalewhen, sounding with his head in one direction, he nevertheless, whileconcealed beneath the surface, mills round, and swiftly swims off in theopposite quarter_this deceitfulness of his could not now be in action;for there was no reason to suppose that the fish seen by tashtego hadbeen in any way alarmed, or indeed knew at all of our vicinity. one ofthe men selected for shipkeepers_that is, those not appointed tothe boats, by this time relieved the indian at the main-mast head. thesailors at the fore and mizzen had come down; the line tubs were fixedin their places; the cranes were thrust out; the mainyard was backed,and the three boats swung over the sea like three samphire baskets overhigh cliffs. outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with one handclung to the rail, while one foot was expectantly poised on the gunwale.so look the long line of man-of-war's men about to throw themselves onboard an enemy's ship.but at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that tookevery eye from the whale. with a start all glared at dark ahab, who wassurrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air.chapter 48. the first lowering.the phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flitting on the other sideof the deck, and, with a noiseless celerity, were casting loose thetackles and bands of the boat which swung there. this boat had alwaysbeen deemed one of the spare boats, though technically called thecaptain's, on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter. thefigure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart, with one whitetooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips. a rumpled chinesejacket of black cotton funereally invested him, with wide black trowsersof the same dark stuff. but strangely crowning this ebonness was aglistening white plaited turban, the living hair braided and coiledround and round upon his head. less swart in aspect, the companions ofthis figure were of that vivid, tiger-yellow complexion peculiar tosome of the aboriginal natives of the manillas;_a race notorious fora certain diabolism of subtilty, and by some honest white marinerssupposed to be the paid spies and secret confidential agents on thewater of the devil, their lord, whose counting-room they suppose to beelsewhere.while yet the wondering ship's company were gazing upon thesestrangers, ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their head,"all ready there, fedallah?""ready," was the half-hissed reply."lower away then; d'ye hear?" shouting across the deck. "loweraway there, i say."such was the thunder of his voice, that spite of their amazement the mensprang over the rail; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks; with awallow, the three boats dropped into the sea; while, with a dexterous,off-handed daring, unknown in any other vocation, the sailors,goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship's side into the tossed boatsbelow.hardly had they pulled out from under the ship's lee, when a fourthkeel, coming from the windward side, pulled round under the stern, andshowed the five strangers rowing ahab, who, standing erect in the stern,loudly hailed starbuck, stubb, and flask, to spread themselves widely,so as to cover a large expanse of water. but with all their eyes againriveted upon the swart fedallah and his crew, the inmates of the otherboats obeyed not the command."captain ahab?_" said starbuck."spread yourselves," cried ahab; "give way, all four boats. thou,flask, pull out more to leeward!""aye, aye, sir," cheerily cried little king-post, sweeping roundhis great steering oar. "lay back!" addressing his crew."there!_there!_there again! there she blows right ahead,boys!_lay back!""never heed yonder yellow boys, archy.""oh, i don't mind'em, sir," said archy; "i knew it all beforenow. didn't i hear _em in the hold? and didn't i tell cabaco hereof it? what say ye, cabaco? they are stowaways, mr. flask.""pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive; pull, my children; pull, my littleones," drawlingly and soothingly sighed stubb to his crew, some ofwhom still showed signs of uneasiness. "why don't you break yourbackbones, my boys? what is it you stare at? those chaps in yonder boat?tut! they are only five more hands come to help us_never mind fromwhere_the more the merrier. pull, then, do pull; never mind thebrimstone_devils are good fellows enough. so, so; there you are now;that's the stroke for a thousand pounds; that's the stroke to sweepthe stakes! hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil, my heroes!three cheers, men_all hearts alive! easy, easy; don't be in ahurry_don't be in a hurry. why don't you snap your oars, yourascals? bite something, you dogs! so, so, so, then:_softly, softly!that's it_that's it! long and strong. give way there, give way!the devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscallions; ye are all asleep. stopsnoring, ye sleepers, and pull. pull, will ye? pull, can't ye? pull,won't ye? why in the name of gudgeons and ginger-cakes don'tye pull?_pull and break something! pull, and start your eyes out!here!" whipping out the sharp knife from his girdle; "everymother's son of ye draw his knife, and pull with the blade between histeeth. that's it_that's it. now ye do something; that looks likeit, my steel-bits. start her_start her, my silver-spoons! start her,marling-spikes!"stubb's exordium to his crew is given here at large, because he hadrather a peculiar way of talking to them in general, and especially ininculcating the religion of rowing. but you must not suppose from thisspecimen of his sermonizings that he ever flew into downright passionswith his congregation. not at all; and therein consisted his chiefpeculiarity. he would say the most terrific things to his crew, in atone so strangely compounded of fun and fury, and the fury seemed socalculated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oarsman could hear suchqueer invocations without pulling for dear life, and yet pulling forthe mere joke of the thing. besides he all the time looked so easy andindolent himself, so loungingly managed his steering-oar, and so broadlygaped_open-mouthed at times_that the mere sight of such a yawningcommander, by sheer force of contrast, acted like a charm upon the crew.then again, stubb was one of those odd sort of humorists, whose jollityis sometimes so curiously ambiguous, as to put all inferiors on theirguard in the matter of obeying them.in obedience to a sign from ahab, starbuck was now pulling obliquelyacross stubb's bow; and when for a minute or so the two boats werepretty near to each other, stubb hailed the mate."mr. starbuck! larboard boat there, ahoy! a word with ye, sir, if yeplease!""halloa!" returned starbuck, turning round not a single inch as hespoke; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew; his face setlike a flint from stubb's."what think ye of those yellow boys, sir!""smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed. (strong, strong,boys!)" in a whisper to his crew, then speaking out loud again: "asad business, mr. stubb! (seethe her, seethe her, my lads!) but nevermind, mr. stubb, all for the best. let all your crew pull strong, comewhat will. (spring, my men, spring!) there's hogsheads of spermahead, mr. stubb, and that's what ye came for. (pull, my boys!) sperm,sperm's the play! this at least is duty; duty and profit hand inhand.""aye, aye, i thought as much," soliloquized stubb, when the boatsdiverged, "as soon as i clapt eye on _em, i thought so. aye, andthat's what he went into the after hold for, so often, as dough-boylong suspected. they were hidden down there. the white whale's at thebottom of it. well, well, so be it! can't be helped! all right! giveway, men! it ain't the white whale to-day! give way!"now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such a critical instantas the lowering of the boats from the deck, this had not unreasonablyawakened a sort of superstitious amazement in some of the ship'scompany; but archy's fancied discovery having some time previous gotabroad among them, though indeed not credited then, this had in somesmall measure prepared them for the event. it took off the extreme edgeof their wonder; and so what with all this and stubb's confident wayof accounting for their appearance, they were for the time freed fromsuperstitious surmisings; though the affair still left abundant room forall manner of wild conjectures as to dark ahab's precise agency in thematter from the beginning. for me, i silently recalled the mysteriousshadows i had seen creeping on board the pequod during the dim nantucketdawn, as well as the enigmatical hintings of the unaccountable elijah.meantime, ahab, out of hearing of his officers, having sided thefurthest to windward, was still ranging ahead of the other boats; acircumstance bespeaking how potent a crew was pulling him. those tigeryellow creatures of his seemed all steel and whalebone; like fivetrip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes of strength, whichperiodically started the boat along the water like a horizontal burstboiler out of a mississippi steamer. as for fedallah, who was seenpulling the harpooneer oar, he had thrown aside his black jacket, anddisplayed his naked chest with the whole part of his body above thegunwale, clearly cut against the alternating depressions of the wateryhorizon; while at the other end of the boat ahab, with one arm, like afencer's, thrown half backward into the air, as if to counterbalanceany tendency to trip; ahab was seen steadily managing his steering oaras in a thousand boat lowerings ere the white whale had torn him. allat once the outstretched arm gave a peculiar motion and then remainedfixed, while the boat's five oars were seen simultaneously peaked.boat and crew sat motionless on the sea. instantly the three spreadboats in the rear paused on their way. the whales had irregularlysettled bodily down into the blue, thus giving no distantly discernibletoken of the movement, though from his closer vicinity ahab had observedit."every man look out along his oars!" cried starbuck. "thou,queequeg, stand up!"nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in the bow, the savagestood erect there, and with intensely eager eyes gazed off towards thespot where the chase had last been descried. likewise upon the extremestern of the boat where it was also triangularly platformed level withthe gunwale, starbuck himself was seen coolly and adroitly balancinghimself to the jerking tossings of his chip of a craft, and silentlyeyeing the vast blue eye of the sea.not very far distant flask's boat was also lying breathlessly still;its commander recklessly standing upon the top of the loggerhead, astout sort of post rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet abovethe level of the stern platform. it is used for catching turns withthe whale line. its top is not more spacious than the palm of a man'shand, and standing upon such a base as that, flask seemed perched at themast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but her trucks. but littleking-post was small and short, and at the same time little king-post wasfull of a large and tall ambition, so that this loggerhead stand-pointof his did by no means satisfy king-post."i can't see three seas off; tip us up an oar there, and let me onto that."upon this, daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale to steady hisway, swiftly slid aft, and then erecting himself volunteered his loftyshoulders for a pedestal."good a mast-head as any, sir. will you mount?""that i will, and thank ye very much, my fine fellow; only i wish youfifty feet taller."whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of theboat, the gigantic negro, stooping a little, presented his flat palmto flask's foot, and then putting flask's hand on his hearse-plumedhead and bidding him spring as he himself should toss, with onedexterous fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders. andhere was flask now standing, daggoo with one lifted arm furnishing himwith a breastband to lean against and steady himself by.at any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with what wondroushabitude of unconscious skill the whaleman will maintain an erectposture in his boat, even when pitched about by the most riotouslyperverse and cross-running seas. still more strange to see him giddilyperched upon the loggerhead itself, under such circumstances. but thesight of little flask mounted upon gigantic daggoo was yet more curious;for sustaining himself with a cool, indifferent, easy, unthought of,barbaric majesty, the noble negro to every roll of the sea harmoniouslyrolled his fine form. on his broad back, flaxen-haired flask seemeda snow-flake. the bearer looked nobler than the rider. though trulyvivacious, tumultuous, ostentatious little flask would now and thenstamp with impatience; but not one added heave did he thereby give tothe negro's lordly chest. so have i seen passion and vanity stampingthe living magnanimous earth, but the earth did not alter her tides andher seasons for that.meanwhile stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such far-gazingsolicitudes. the whales might have made one of their regular soundings,not a temporary dive from mere fright; and if that were the case,stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved to solace thelanguishing interval with his pipe. he withdrew it from his hatband,where he always wore it aslant like a feather. he loaded it, and rammedhome the loading with his thumb-end; but hardly had he ignited his matchacross the rough sandpaper of his hand, when tashtego, his harpooneer,whose eyes had been setting to windward like two fixed stars, suddenlydropped like light from his erect attitude to his seat, crying out ina quick phrensy of hurry, "down, down all, and give way!_there theyare!"to a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, would have beenvisible at that moment; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish whitewater, and thin scattered puffs of vapour hovering over it, andsuffusingly blowing off to leeward, like the confused scud from whiterolling billows. the air around suddenly vibrated and tingled, as itwere, like the air over intensely heated plates of iron. beneath thisatmospheric waving and curling, and partially beneath a thin layer ofwater, also, the whales were swimming. seen in advance of all the otherindications, the puffs of vapour they spouted, seemed their forerunningcouriers and detached flying outriders.all four boats were now in keen pursuit of that one spot of troubledwater and air. but it bade fair to outstrip them; it flew on and on,as a mass of interblending bubbles borne down a rapid stream from thehills."pull, pull, my good boys," said starbuck, in the lowest possiblebut intensest concentrated whisper to his men; while the sharp fixedglance from his eyes darted straight ahead of the bow, almost seemed astwo visible needles in two unerring binnacle compasses. he did not saymuch to his crew, though, nor did his crew say anything to him. only thesilence of the boat was at intervals startlingly pierced by one of hispeculiar whispers, now harsh with command, now soft with entreaty.how different the loud little king-post. "sing out and say something,my hearties. roar and pull, my thunderbolts! beach me, beach me on theirblack backs, boys; only do that for me, and i'll sign over to you mymartha's vineyard plantation, boys; including wife and children, boys.lay me on_lay me on! o lord, lord! but i shall go stark, staring mad!see! see that white water!" and so shouting, he pulled his hat fromhis head, and stamped up and down on it; then picking it up, flirted itfar off upon the sea; and finally fell to rearing and plunging in theboat's stern like a crazed colt from the prairie."look at that chap now," philosophically drawled stubb, who, withhis unlighted short pipe, mechanically retained between his teeth, ata short distance, followed after_"he's got fits, that flask has.fits? yes, give him fits_that's the very word_pitch fitsinto _em. merrily, merrily, hearts-alive. pudding for supper, youknow;_merry's the word. pull, babes_pull, sucklings_pull, all.but what the devil are you hurrying about? softly, softly, and steadily,my men. only pull, and keep pulling; nothing more. crack all yourbackbones, and bite your knives in two_that's all. take iteasy_why don't ye take it easy, i say, and burst all your livers andlungs!"but what it was that inscrutable ahab said to that tiger-yellow crew ofhis_these were words best omitted here; for you live under the blessedlight of the evangelical land. only the infidel sharks in the audaciousseas may give ear to such words, when, with tornado brow, and eyes ofred murder, and foam-glued lips, ahab leaped after his prey.meanwhile, all the boats tore on. the repeated specific allusions offlask to "that whale," as he called the fictitious monster whichhe declared to be incessantly tantalizing his boat's bow with itstail_these allusions of his were at times so vivid and life-like, thatthey would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fearful lookover the shoulder. but this was against all rule; for the oarsmenmust put out their eyes, and ram a skewer through their necks; usagepronouncing that they must have no organs but ears, and no limbs butarms, in these critical moments.it was a sight full of quick wonder and awe! the vast swells of theomnipotent sea; the surging, hollow roar they made, as they rolled alongthe eight gunwales, like gigantic bowls in a boundless bowling-green;the brief suspended agony of the boat, as it would tip for an instant onthe knife-like edge of the sharper waves, that almost seemed threateningto cut it in two; the sudden profound dip into the watery glens andhollows; the keen spurrings and goadings to gain the top of the oppositehill; the headlong, sled-like slide down its other side;_all these,with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers, and the shuddering gaspsof the oarsmen, with the wondrous sight of the ivory pequod bearingdown upon her boats with outstretched sails, like a wild hen after herscreaming brood;_all this was thrilling.not the raw recruit, marching from the bosom of his wife into the feverheat of his first battle; not the dead man's ghost encountering thefirst unknown phantom in the other world;_neither of these can feelstranger and stronger emotions than that man does, who for the firsttime finds himself pulling into the charmed, churned circle of thehunted sperm whale.the dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more and morevisible, owing to the increasing darkness of the dun cloud-shadowsflung upon the sea. the jets of vapour no longer blended, but tiltedeverywhere to right and left; the whales seemed separating their wakes.the boats were pulled more apart; starbuck giving chase to three whalesrunning dead to leeward. our sail was now set, and, with the stillrising wind, we rushed along; the boat going with such madness throughthe water, that the lee oars could scarcely be worked rapidly enough toescape being torn from the row-locks.soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist; neither shipnor boat to be seen."give way, men," whispered starbuck, drawing still further aft thesheet of his sail; "there is time to kill a fish yet before the squallcomes. there's white water again!_close to! spring!"soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side of us denotedthat the other boats had got fast; but hardly were they overheard, whenwith a lightning-like hurtling whisper starbuck said: "stand up!"and queequeg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet.though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the life and death perilso close to them ahead, yet with their eyes on the intense countenanceof the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew that the imminentinstant had come; they heard, too, an enormous wallowing sound as offifty elephants stirring in their litter. meanwhile the boat was stillbooming through the mist, the waves curling and hissing around us likethe erected crests of enraged serpents."that's his hump. there, there, give it to him!" whisperedstarbuck.a short rushing sound leaped out of the boat; it was the darted iron ofqueequeg. then all in one welded commotion came an invisible push fromastern, while forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge; the sailcollapsed and exploded; a gush of scalding vapour shot up near by;something rolled and tumbled like an earthquake beneath us. the wholecrew were half suffocated as they were tossed helter-skelter into thewhite curdling cream of the squall. squall, whale, and harpoon had allblended together; and the whale, merely grazed by the iron, escaped.though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed. swimming roundit we picked up the floating oars, and lashing them across the gunwale,tumbled back to our places. there we sat up to our knees in the sea, thewater covering every rib and plank, so that to our downward gazing eyesthe suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown up to us from the bottomof the ocean.the wind increased to a howl; the waves dashed their bucklers together;the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around us like a whitefire upon the prairie, in which, unconsumed, we were burning; immortalin these jaws of death! in vain we hailed the other boats; as well roarto the live coals down the chimney of a flaming furnace as hail thoseboats in that storm. meanwhile the driving scud, rack, and mist, grewdarker with the shadows of night; no sign of the ship could be seen.the rising sea forbade all attempts to bale out the boat. the oars wereuseless as propellers, performing now the office of life-preservers.so, cutting the lashing of the waterproof match keg, after many failuresstarbuck contrived to ignite the lamp in the lantern; then stretchingit on a waif pole, handed it to queequeg as the standard-bearer of thisforlorn hope. there, then, he sat, holding up that imbecile candle inthe heart of that almighty forlornness. there, then, he sat, the signand symbol of a man without faith, hopelessly holding up hope in themidst of despair.wet, drenched through, and shivering cold, despairing of ship or boat,we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on. the mist still spread overthe sea, the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom of the boat.suddenly queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his hand to his ear.we all heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yards hitherto muffled bythe storm. the sound came nearer and nearer; the thick mists were dimlyparted by a huge, vague form. affrighted, we all sprang into the sea asthe ship at last loomed into view, bearing right down upon us within adistance of not much more than its length.floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as for one instant ittossed and gaped beneath the ship's bows like a chip at the base of acataract; and then the vast hull rolled over it, and it was seen nomore till it came up weltering astern. again we swam for it, were dashedagainst it by the seas, and were at last taken up and safely landed onboard. ere the squall came close to, the other boats had cut loose fromtheir fish and returned to the ship in good time. the ship had given usup, but was still cruising, if haply it might light upon some token ofour perishing,_an oar or a lance pole.chapter 49. the hyena.there are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affairwe call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practicaljoke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more thansuspects that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own. however,nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing. he boltsdown all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions, all hardthings visible and invisible, never mind how knobby; as an ostrich ofpotent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints. and as for smalldifficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden disaster, peril oflife and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him only sly,good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the unseenand unaccountable old joker. that odd sort of wayward mood i am speakingof, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation; it comesin the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before mighthave seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part of thegeneral joke. there is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed thisfree and easy sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it i nowregarded this whole voyage of the pequod, and the great white whale itsobject."queequeg," said i, when they had dragged me, the last man, tothe deck, and i was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling offthe water; "queequeg, my fine friend, does this sort of thing oftenhappen?" without much emotion, though soaked through just like me, hegave me to understand that such things did often happen."mr. stubb," said i, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in hisoil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; "mr. stubb, ithink i have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chiefmate, mr. starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. i supposethen, that going plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggysquall is the height of a whaleman's discretion?""certain. i've lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale offcape horn.""mr. flask," said i, turning to little king-post, who was standingclose by; "you are experienced in these things, and i am not. will youtell me whether it is an unalterable law in this fishery, mr. flask,for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himself back-foremost intodeath's jaws?""can't you twist that smaller?" said flask. "yes, that's thelaw. i should like to see a boat's crew backing water up to a whaleface foremost. ha, ha! the whale would give them squint for squint, mindthat!"here then, from three impartial witnesses, i had a deliberate statementof the entire case. considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizingsin the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were mattersof common occurrence in this kind of life; considering that at thesuperlatively critical instant of going on to the whale i must resignmy life into the hands of him who steered the boat_oftentimes afellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness upon the point ofscuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings; considering that theparticular disaster to our own particular boat was chiefly to be imputedto starbuck's driving on to his whale almost in the teeth of a squall,and considering that starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous for hisgreat heedfulness in the fishery; considering that i belonged to thisuncommonly prudent starbuck's boat; and finally considering in what adevil's chase i was implicated, touching the white whale: taking allthings together, i say, i thought i might as well go below and make arough draft of my will. "queequeg," said i, "come along, you shallbe my lawyer, executor, and legatee."it may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at theirlast wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world morefond of that diversion. this was the fourth time in my nautical lifethat i had done the same thing. after the ceremony was concluded uponthe present occasion, i felt all the easier; a stone was rolled awayfrom my heart. besides, all the days i should now live would be as goodas the days that lazarus lived after his resurrection; a supplementaryclean gain of so many months or weeks as the case might be. i survivedmyself; my death and burial were locked up in my chest. i lookedround me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a cleanconscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.now then, thought i, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock,here goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and thedevil fetch the hindmost.chapter 50. ahab's boat and crew. fedallah."who would have thought it, flask!" cried stubb; "if i had but oneleg you would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-holewith my timber toe. oh! he's a wonderful old man!""i don't think it so strange, after all, on that account," saidflask. "if his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a differentthing. that would disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of theother left, you know.""i don't know that, my little man; i never yet saw him kneel."among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, consideringthe paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it isright for a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perilsof the chase. so tamerlane's soldiers often argued with tears in theireyes, whether that invaluable life of his ought to be carried into thethickest of the fight.but with ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. consideringthat with two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger;considering that the pursuit of whales is always under great andextraordinary difficulties; that every individual moment, indeed, thencomprises a peril; under these circumstances is it wise for anymaimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt? as a general thing, thejoint-owners of the pequod must have plainly thought not.ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little ofhis entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes ofthe chase, for the sake of being near the scene of action and givinghis orders in person, yet for captain ahab to have a boat actuallyapportioned to him as a regular headsman in the hunt_above all forcaptain ahab to be supplied with five extra men, as that same boat'screw, he well knew that such generous conceits never entered the headsof the owners of the pequod. therefore he had not solicited a boat'screw from them, nor had he in any way hinted his desires on that head.nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own touching all thatmatter. until cabaco's published discovery, the sailors had littleforeseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while outof port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting thewhaleboats for service; when some time after this ahab was now and thenfound bestirring himself in the matter of making thole-pins with hisown hands for what was thought to be one of the spare boats, and evensolicitously cutting the small wooden skewers, which when the line isrunning out are pinned over the groove in the bow: when all this wasobserved in him, and particularly his solicitude in having an extracoat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make it betterwithstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the anxietyhe evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it issometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat's bow for bracingthe knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it wasobserved how often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixedin the semi-circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter'schisel gouged out a little here and straightened it a little there; allthese things, i say, had awakened much interest and curiosity at thetime. but almost everybody supposed that this particular preparativeheedfulness in ahab must only be with a view to the ultimate chase ofmoby dick; for he had already revealed his intention to hunt that mortalmonster in person. but such a supposition did by no means involve theremotest suspicion as to any boat's crew being assigned to that boat.now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon wanedaway; for in a whaler wonders soon wane. besides, now and then suchunaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from the unknownnooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating outlaws ofwhalers; and the ships themselves often pick up such queer castawaycreatures found tossing about the open sea on planks, bits of wreck,oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off japanese junks, and what not; thatbeelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down into the cabinto chat with the captain, and it would not create any unsubduableexcitement in the forecastle.but be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinatephantoms soon found their place among the crew, though still as it weresomehow distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned fedallah remaineda muffled mystery to the last. whence he came in a mannerly world likethis, by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to belinked with ahab's peculiar fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sortof a half-hinted influence; heaven knows, but it might have been evenauthority over him; all this none knew. but one cannot sustainan indifferent air concerning fedallah. he was such a creature ascivilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in theirdreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glideamong the unchanging asiatic communities, especially the oriental islesto the east of the continent_those insulated, immemorial, unalterablecountries, which even in these modern days still preserve much of theghostly aboriginalness of earth's primal generations, when thememory of the first man was a distinct recollection, and all men hisdescendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each other as real phantoms,and asked of the sun and the moon why they were created and to what end;when though, according to genesis, the angels indeed consorted with thedaughters of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical rabbins, indulgedin mundane amours.chapter 51. the spirit-spout.days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory pequod had slowlyswept across four several cruising-grounds; that off the azores; off thecape de verdes; on the plate (so called), being off the mouth of therio de la plata; and the carrol ground, an unstaked, watery locality,southerly from st. helena.it was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene andmoonlight night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver;and, by their soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silverysilence, not a solitude; on such a silent night a silvery jet was seenfar in advance of the white bubbles at the bow. lit up by the moon, itlooked celestial; seemed some plumed and glittering god uprising fromthe sea. fedallah first descried this jet. for of these moonlightnights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast head, and stand alook-out there, with the same precision as if it had been day. and yet,though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a hundredwould venture a lowering for them. you may think with what emotions,then, the seamen beheld this old oriental perched aloft at such unusualhours; his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. but when, afterspending his uniform interval there for several successive nightswithout uttering a single sound; when, after all this silence, hisunearthly voice was heard announcing that silvery, moon-lit jet, everyreclining mariner started to his feet as if some winged spirit hadlighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew. "there sheblows!" had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have quiveredmore; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. for though it wasa most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriouslyexciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired alowering.walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, ahab commanded thet'gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. thebest man in the ship must take the helm. then, with every mast-headmanned, the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind. the strange,upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze filling the hollowsof so many sails, made the buoyant, hovering deck to feel like airbeneath the feet; while still she rushed along, as if two antagonisticinfluences were struggling in her_one to mount direct to heaven, theother to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. and had you watchedahab's face that night, you would have thought that in him also twodifferent things were warring. while his one live leg made lively echoesalong the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap.on life and death this old man walked. but though the ship so swiftlysped, and though from every eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot,yet the silvery jet was no more seen that night. every sailor swore hesaw it once, but not a second time.this midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some daysafter, lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again itwas descried by all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more itdisappeared as if it had never been. and so it served us night afternight, till no one heeded it but to wonder at it. mysteriouslyjetted into the clear moonlight, or starlight, as the case might be;disappearing again for one whole day, or two days, or three; and somehowseeming at every distinct repetition to be advancing still further andfurther in our van, this solitary jet seemed for ever alluring us on.nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordancewith the preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things investedthe pequod, were there wanting some of the seamen who swore thatwhenever and wherever descried; at however remote times, or in howeverfar apart latitudes and longitudes, that unnearable spout was castby one self-same whale; and that whale, moby dick. for a time, therereigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at this flitting apparition,as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on, in order that themonster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the remotestand most savage seas.these temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a wondrouspotency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in which, beneathall its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a devilish charm, asfor days and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, lonesomelymild, that all space, in repugnance to our vengeful errand, seemedvacating itself of life before our urn-like prow.but, at last, when turning to the eastward, the cape winds began howlingaround us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas that arethere; when the ivory-tusked pequod sharply bowed to the blast, andgored the dark waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver chips,the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks; then all this desolate vacuityof life went away, but gave place to sights more dismal than before.close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thitherbefore us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. andevery morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; andspite of our hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp,as though they deemed our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a thingappointed to desolation, and therefore fit roosting-place for theirhomeless selves. and heaved and heaved, still unrestingly heaved theblack sea, as if its vast tides were a conscience; and the great mundanesoul were in anguish and remorse for the long sin and suffering it hadbred.cape of good hope, do they call ye? rather cape tormentoso, as calledof yore; for long allured by the perfidious silences that before hadattended us, we found ourselves launched into this tormented sea,where guilty beings transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemedcondemned to swim on everlastingly without any haven in store, or beatthat black air without any horizon. but calm, snow-white, and unvarying;still directing its fountain of feathers to the sky; still beckoning uson from before, the solitary jet would at times be descried.during all this blackness of the elements, ahab, though assuming for thetime the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck,manifested the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever addressedhis mates. in tempestuous times like these, after everything above andaloft has been secured, nothing more can be done but passively to awaitthe issue of the gale. then captain and crew become practical fatalists.so, with his ivory leg inserted into its accustomed hole, and with onehand firmly grasping a shroud, ahab for hours and hours would standgazing dead to windward, while an occasional squall of sleet or snowwould all but congeal his very eyelashes together. meantime, the crewdriven from the forward part of the ship by the perilous seas thatburstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along the bulwarks inthe waist; and the better to guard against the leaping waves, each manhad slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail, in whichhe swung as in a loosened belt. few or no words were spoken; and thesilent ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day toreon through all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves.by night the same muteness of humanity before the shrieks of theocean prevailed; still in silence the men swung in the bowlines; stillwordless ahab stood up to the blast. even when wearied nature seemeddemanding repose he would not seek that repose in his hammock. nevercould starbuck forget the old man's aspect, when one night going downinto the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw him withclosed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the rainand half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time beforeemerged, still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. on thetable beside him lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and currentswhich have previously been spoken of. his lantern swung from his tightlyclenched hand. though the body was erect, the head was thrown back sothat the closed eyes were pointed towards the needle of the tell-talethat swung from a beam in the ceiling.**the cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to thecompass at the helm, the captain, while below, can inform himself of thecourse of the ship.terrible old man! thought starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in thisgale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.chapter 52. the albatross.south-eastward from the cape, off the distant crozetts, a good cruisingground for right whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the goney (albatross)by name. as she slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at thefore-mast-head, i had a good view of that sight so remarkable to a tyroin the far ocean fisheries_a whaler at sea, and long absent from home.as if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like theskeleton of a stranded walrus. all down her sides, this spectralappearance was traced with long channels of reddened rust, while all herspars and her rigging were like the thick branches of trees furred overwith hoar-frost. only her lower sails were set. a wild sight it was tosee her long-bearded look-outs at those three mast-heads. they seemedclad in the skins of beasts, so torn and bepatched the raiment that hadsurvived nearly four years of cruising. standing in iron hoops nailed tothe mast, they swayed and swung over a fathomless sea; and though, whenthe ship slowly glided close under our stern, we six men in the aircame so nigh to each other that we might almost have leaped from themast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those forlorn-lookingfishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word to our ownlook-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below."ship ahoy! have ye seen the white whale?"but as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in theact of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his handinto the sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to makehimself heard without it. meantime his ship was still increasing thedistance between. while in various silent ways the seamen of the pequodwere evincing their observance of this ominous incident at the firstmere mention of the white whale's name to another ship, ahab for amoment paused; it almost seemed as though he would have lowered a boatto board the stranger, had not the threatening wind forbade. but takingadvantage of his windward position, he again seized his trumpet, andknowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a nantucketer andshortly bound home, he loudly hailed_"ahoy there! this is thepequod, bound round the world! tell them to address all future lettersto the pacific ocean! and this time three years, if i am not at home,tell them to address them to_"at that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then,in accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish,that for some days before had been placidly swimming by our side, dartedaway with what seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves fore andaft with the stranger's flanks. though in the course of his continualvoyagings ahab must often before have noticed a similar sight, yet, toany monomaniac man, the veriest trifles capriciously carry meanings."swim away from me, do ye?" murmured ahab, gazing over into thewater. there seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyedmore of deep helpless sadness than the insane old man had ever beforeevinced. but turning to the steersman, who thus far had been holding theship in the wind to diminish her headway, he cried out in his old lionvoice,_"up helm! keep her off round the world!"round the world! there is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings;but whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? only throughnumberless perils to the very point whence we started, where those thatwe left behind secure, were all the time before us.were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could forever reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strangethan any cyclades or islands of king solomon, then there were promisein the voyage. but in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or intormented chase of that demon phantom that, some time or other, swimsbefore all human hearts; while chasing such over this round globe, theyeither lead us on in barren mazes or midway leave us whelmed.chapter 53. the gam.the ostensible reason why ahab did not go on board of the whaler we hadspoken was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. but even hadthis not been the case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boardedher_judging by his subsequent conduct on similar occasions_if soit had been that, by the process of hailing, he had obtained a negativeanswer to the question he put. for, as it eventually turned out, hecared not to consort, even for five minutes, with any stranger captain,except he could contribute some of that information he so absorbinglysought. but all this might remain inadequately estimated, were notsomething said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels whenmeeting each other in foreign seas, and especially on a commoncruising-ground.if two strangers crossing the pine barrens in new york state, or theequally desolate salisbury plain in england; if casually encounteringeach other in such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life ofthem, cannot well avoid a mutual salutation; and stopping for a momentto interchange the news; and, perhaps, sitting down for a whileand resting in concert: then, how much more natural that upon theillimitable pine barrens and salisbury plains of the sea, two whalingvessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth_off lonefanning's island, or the far away king's mills; how much morenatural, i say, that under such circumstances these ships should notonly interchange hails, but come into still closer, more friendly andsociable contact. and especially would this seem to be a matter ofcourse, in the case of vessels owned in one seaport, and whose captains,officers, and not a few of the men are personally known to each other;and consequently, have all sorts of dear domestic things to talk about.for the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters onboard; at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of adate a year or two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-wornfiles. and in return for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship wouldreceive the latest whaling intelligence from the cruising-ground towhich she may be destined, a thing of the utmost importance to her. andin degree, all this will hold true concerning whaling vessels crossingeach other's track on the cruising-ground itself, even though theyare equally long absent from home. for one of them may have received atransfer of letters from some third, and now far remote vessel; andsome of those letters may be for the people of the ship she now meets.besides, they would exchange the whaling news, and have an agreeablechat. for not only would they meet with all the sympathies of sailors,but likewise with all the peculiar congenialities arising from a commonpursuit and mutually shared privations and perils.nor would difference of country make any very essential difference;that is, so long as both parties speak one language, as is the casewith americans and english. though, to be sure, from the small number ofenglish whalers, such meetings do not very often occur, and when theydo occur there is too apt to be a sort of shyness between them; for yourenglishman is rather reserved, and your yankee, he does not fancy thatsort of thing in anybody but himself. besides, the english whalerssometimes affect a kind of metropolitan superiority over the americanwhalers; regarding the long, lean nantucketer, with his nondescriptprovincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. but where this superiorityin the english whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to say,seeing that the yankees in one day, collectively, kill more whales thanall the english, collectively, in ten years. but this is a harmlesslittle foible in the english whale-hunters, which the nantucketer doesnot take much to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a fewfoibles himself.so, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, thewhalers have most reason to be sociable_and they are so. whereas, somemerchant ships crossing each other's wake in the mid-atlantic, willoftentimes pass on without so much as a single word of recognition,mutually cutting each other on the high seas, like a brace of dandies inbroadway; and all the time indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism uponeach other's rig. as for men-of-war, when they chance to meet at sea,they first go through such a string of silly bowings and scrapings, sucha ducking of ensigns, that there does not seem to be much right-downhearty good-will and brotherly love about it at all. as touchingslave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious hurry, they runaway from each other as soon as possible. and as for pirates, when theychance to cross each other's cross-bones, the first hail is_"howmany skulls?"_the same way that whalers hail_"how manybarrels?" and that question once answered, pirates straightway steerapart, for they are infernal villains on both sides, and don't like tosee overmuch of each other's villanous likenesses.but look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable,free-and-easy whaler! what does the whaler do when she meets anotherwhaler in any sort of decent weather? she has a "gam," a thing soutterly unknown to all other ships that they never heard of the nameeven; and if by chance they should hear of it, they only grin at it, andrepeat gamesome stuff about "spouters" and "blubber-boilers,"and such like pretty exclamations. why it is that all merchant-seamen,and also all pirates and man-of-war's men, and slave-ship sailors,cherish such a scornful feeling towards whale-ships; this is a questionit would be hard to answer. because, in the case of pirates, say, ishould like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiarglory about it. it sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; butonly at the gallows. and besides, when a man is elevated in that oddfashion, he has no proper foundation for his superior altitude. hence,i conclude, that in boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman,in that assertion the pirate has no solid basis to stand on.but what is a gam? you might wear out your index-finger running up anddown the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. dr. johnsonnever attained to that erudition; noah webster's ark does not hold it.nevertheless, this same expressive word has now for many years been inconstant use among some fifteen thousand true born yankees. certainly,it needs a definition, and should be incorporated into the lexicon. withthat view, let me learnedly define it.gam. noun_a social meeting of two (or more) whaleships, generally ona cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange visitsby boats' crews; the two captains remaining, for the time, on board ofone ship, and the two chief mates on the other.there is another little item about gamming which must not be forgottenhere. all professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; sohas the whale fishery. in a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, whenthe captain is rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the sternsheets on a comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and oftensteers himself with a pretty little milliner's tiller decorated withgay cords and ribbons. but the whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa ofthat sort whatever, and no tiller at all. high times indeed, if whalingcaptains were wheeled about the water on castors like gouty old aldermenin patent chairs. and as for a tiller, the whale-boat never admits ofany such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a complete boat'screw must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or harpooneer isof the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the occasion, andthe captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his visitall standing like a pine tree. and often you will notice that beingconscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him fromthe sides of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to theimportance of sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. nor isthis any very easy matter; for in his rear is the immense projectingsteering oar hitting him now and then in the small of his back, theafter-oar reciprocating by rapping his knees in front. he is thuscompletely wedged before and behind, and can only expand himselfsideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden, violentpitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length offoundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. merely make aspread angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. then, again,it would never do in plain sight of the world's riveted eyes, itwould never do, i say, for this straddling captain to be seen steadyinghimself the slightest particle by catching hold of anything withhis hands; indeed, as token of his entire, buoyant self-command, hegenerally carries his hands in his trowsers' pockets; but perhapsbeing generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there forballast. nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticatedones too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly criticalmoment or two, in a sudden squall say_to seize hold of the nearestoarsman's hair, and hold on there like grim death.chapter 54. the town-ho's story.(as told at the golden inn)the cape of good hope, and all the watery region round about there, ismuch like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meetmore travellers than in any other part.it was not very long after speaking the goney that anotherhomeward-bound whaleman, the town-ho,* was encountered. she was mannedalmost wholly by polynesians. in the short gam that ensued she gaveus strong news of moby dick. to some the general interest in the whitewhale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance of the town-ho'sstory, which seemed obscurely to involve with the whale a certainwondrous, inverted visitation of one of those so called judgments of godwhich at times are said to overtake some men. this latter circumstance,with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may be called thesecret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never reached the earsof captain ahab or his mates. for that secret part of the story wasunknown to the captain of the town-ho himself. it was the privateproperty of three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of whom, itseems, communicated it to tashtego with romish injunctions of secrecy,but the following night tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealedso much of it in that way, that when he was wakened he could not wellwithhold the rest. nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thinghave on those seamen in the pequod who came to the full knowledge ofit, and by such a strange delicacy, to call it so, were they governed inthis matter, that they kept the secret among themselves so that it nevertranspired abaft the pequod's main-mast. interweaving in its properplace this darker thread with the story as publicly narrated on theship, the whole of this strange affair i now proceed to put on lastingrecord.*the ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head,still used by whalemen in hunting the famous gallipagos terrapin.for my humor's sake, i shall preserve the style in which i oncenarrated it at lima, to a lounging circle of my spanish friends, onesaint's eve, smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the goldeninn. of those fine cavaliers, the young dons, pedro and sebastian, wereon the closer terms with me; and hence the interluding questions theyoccasionally put, and which are duly answered at the time."some two years prior to my first learning the events which i am aboutrehearsing to you, gentlemen, the town-ho, sperm whaler of nantucket,was cruising in your pacific here, not very many days' sail eastwardfrom the eaves of this good golden inn. she was somewhere to thenorthward of the line. one morning upon handling the pumps, according todaily usage, it was observed that she made more water in her hold thancommon. they supposed a sword-fish had stabbed her, gentlemen. but thecaptain, having some unusual reason for believing that rare good luckawaited him in those latitudes; and therefore being very averse to quitthem, and the leak not being then considered at all dangerous, though,indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as low downas was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued hercruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals;but no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was the leak yetundiscovered, but it sensibly increased. so much so, that now takingsome alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearestharbor among the islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired."though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chancefavoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way,because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically relieved atthem, those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free;never mind if the leak should double on her. in truth, well nigh thewhole of this passage being attended by very prosperous breezes, thetown-ho had all but certainly arrived in perfect safety at her portwithout the occurrence of the least fatality, had it not been for thebrutal overbearing of radney, the mate, a vineyarder, and the bitterlyprovoked vengeance of steelkilt, a lakeman and desperado from buffalo."_lakeman!_buffalo! pray, what is a lakeman, and where isbuffalo?' said don sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass."on the eastern shore of our lake erie, don; but_i crave yourcourtesy_may be, you shall soon hear further of all that. now,gentlemen, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships, well-nigh aslarge and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old callao to farmanilla; this lakeman, in the land-locked heart of our america, had yetbeen nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting impressions popularlyconnected with the open ocean. for in their interflowing aggregate,those grand fresh-water seas of ours,_erie, and ontario, and huron,and superior, and michigan,_possess an ocean-like expansiveness, withmany of the ocean's noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varietiesof races and of climes. they contain round archipelagoes of romanticisles, even as the polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored bytwo great contrasting nations, as the atlantic is; they furnish longmaritime approaches to our numerous territorial colonies from theeast, dotted all round their banks; here and there are frowned upon bybatteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns of lofty mackinaw; they haveheard the fleet thunderings of naval victories; at intervals, they yieldtheir beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted faces flash from outtheir peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked by ancientand unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried linesof kings in gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild africbeasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robesto tartar emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of buffalo andcleveland, as well as winnebago villages; they float alike thefull-rigged merchant ship, the armed cruiser of the state, the steamer,and the beech canoe; they are swept by borean and dismasting blasts asdireful as any that lash the salted wave; they know what shipwrecks are,for out of sight of land, however inland, they have drowned full manya midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. thus, gentlemen, thoughan inlander, steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean nurtured;as much of an audacious mariner as any. and for radney, though in hisinfancy he may have laid him down on the lone nantucket beach, to nurseat his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed ouraustere atlantic and your contemplative pacific; yet was he quite asvengeful and full of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, freshfrom the latitudes of buck-horn handled bowie-knives. yet was thisnantucketer a man with some good-hearted traits; and this lakeman, amariner, who though a sort of devil indeed, might yet by inflexiblefirmness, only tempered by that common decency of human recognitionwhich is the meanest slave's right; thus treated, this steelkilt hadlong been retained harmless and docile. at all events, he had provedso thus far; but radney was doomed and made mad, and steelkilt_but,gentlemen, you shall hear."it was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointingher prow for her island haven, that the town-ho's leak seemed againincreasing, but only so as to require an hour or more at the pumpsevery day. you must know that in a settled and civilized ocean like ouratlantic, for example, some skippers think little of pumping their wholeway across it; though of a still, sleepy night, should the officer ofthe deck happen to forget his duty in that respect, the probabilitywould be that he and his shipmates would never again remember it, onaccount of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. nor in thesolitary and savage seas far from you to the westward, gentlemen, is italtogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles infull chorus even for a voyage of considerable length; that is, if it liealong a tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable retreatis afforded them. it is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out ofthe way part of those waters, some really landless latitude, that hercaptain begins to feel a little anxious."much this way had it been with the town-ho; so when her leakwas found gaining once more, there was in truth some small concernmanifested by several of her company; especially by radney the mate.he commanded the upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, andevery way expanded to the breeze. now this radney, i suppose, wasas little of a coward, and as little inclined to any sort of nervousapprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless, unthinkingcreature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine, gentlemen.therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the ship,some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being apart owner in her. so when they were working that evening at the pumps,there was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them,as they stood with their feet continually overflowed by the ripplingclear water; clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen_that bubblingfrom the pumps ran across the deck, and poured itself out in steadyspouts at the lee scupper-holes."now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventionalworld of ours_watery or otherwise; that when a person placed incommand over his fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantlyhis superior in general pride of manhood, straightway against that manhe conceives an unconquerable dislike and bitterness; and if he havea chance he will pull down and pulverize that subaltern's tower, andmake a little heap of dust of it. be this conceit of mine as it may,gentlemen, at all events steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with ahead like a roman, and a flowing golden beard like the tasseled housingsof your last viceroy's snorting charger; and a brain, and a heart, anda soul in him, gentlemen, which had made steelkilt charlemagne, had hebeen born son to charlemagne's father. but radney, the mate, was uglyas a mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. he did not lovesteelkilt, and steelkilt knew it."espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with therest, the lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on withhis gay banterings."_aye, aye, my merry lads, it's a lively leak this; hold acannikin, one of ye, and let's have a taste. by the lord, it's worthbottling! i tell ye what, men, old rad's investment must go for it!he had best cut away his part of the hull and tow it home. the fact is,boys, that sword-fish only began the job; he's come back again with agang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish, and what not; and thewhole posse of _em are now hard at work cutting and slashing at thebottom; making improvements, i suppose. if old rad were here now, i'dtell him to jump overboard and scatter _em. they're playingthe devil with his estate, i can tell him. but he's a simple oldsoul,_rad, and a beauty too. boys, they say the rest of his propertyis invested in looking-glasses. i wonder if he'd give a poor devillike me the model of his nose.'"_damn your eyes! what's that pump stopping for?' roared radney,pretending not to have heard the sailors' talk. _thunder away atit!'"_aye, aye, sir,' said steelkilt, merry as a cricket. _lively,boys, lively, now!' and with that the pump clanged like fiftyfire-engines; the men tossed their hats off to it, and ere long thatpeculiar gasping of the lungs was heard which denotes the fullesttension of life's utmost energies."quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the lakemanwent forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his facefiery red, his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from hisbrow. now what cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed radneyto meddle with such a man in that corporeally exasperated state, i knownot; but so it happened. intolerably striding along the deck, the matecommanded him to get a broom and sweep down the planks, and also ashovel, and remove some offensive matters consequent upon allowing a pigto run at large."now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship's deck at sea is a piece ofhousehold work which in all times but raging gales is regularly attendedto every evening; it has been known to be done in the case of shipsactually foundering at the time. such, gentlemen, is the inflexibilityof sea-usages and the instinctive love of neatness in seamen; some ofwhom would not willingly drown without first washing their faces. butin all vessels this broom business is the prescriptive province of theboys, if boys there be aboard. besides, it was the stronger men in thetown-ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns at the pumps; andbeing the most athletic seaman of them all, steelkilt had been regularlyassigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should havebeen freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nauticalduties, such being the case with his comrades. i mention all theseparticulars so that you may understand exactly how this affair stoodbetween the two men."but there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almostas plainly meant to sting and insult steelkilt, as though radney hadspat in his face. any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship willunderstand this; and all this and doubtless much more, the lakeman fullycomprehended when the mate uttered his command. but as he sat still fora moment, and as he steadfastly looked into the mate's malignanteye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him and theslow-match silently burning along towards them; as he instinctivelysaw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir up thedeeper passionateness in any already ireful being_a repugnance mostfelt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved_thisnameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over steelkilt."therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodilyexhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweepingthe deck was not his business, and he would not do it. and then, withoutat all alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the customarysweepers; who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done little ornothing all day. to this, radney replied with an oath, in a mostdomineering and outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating hiscommand; meanwhile advancing upon the still seated lakeman, with anuplifted cooper's club hammer which he had snatched from a cask nearby."heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps,for all his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating steelkiltcould but ill brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow stillsmothering the conflagration within him, without speaking he remaineddoggedly rooted to his seat, till at last the incensed radney shook thehammer within a few inches of his face, furiously commanding him to dohis bidding."steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadilyfollowed by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated hisintention not to obey. seeing, however, that his forbearance had notthe slightest effect, by an awful and unspeakable intimation with histwisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man; but it was tono purpose. and in this way the two went once slowly round the windlass;when, resolved at last no longer to retreat, bethinking him that he hadnow forborne as much as comported with his humor, the lakeman paused onthe hatches and thus spoke to the officer:"_mr. radney, i will not obey you. take that hammer away, or lookto yourself.' but the predestinated mate coming still closer to him,where the lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inchof his teeth; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions.retreating not the thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eyewith the unflinching poniard of his glance, steelkilt, clenchinghis right hand behind him and creepingly drawing it back, told hispersecutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he (steelkilt) wouldmurder him. but, gentlemen, the fool had been branded for the slaughterby the gods. immediately the hammer touched the cheek; the next instantthe lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he fell on the hatchspouting blood like a whale."ere the cry could go aft steelkilt was shaking one of the backstaysleading far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing theirmastheads. they were both canallers."_canallers!' cried don pedro. _we have seen many whale-shipsin our harbours, but never heard of your canallers. pardon: who and whatare they?'"_canallers, don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand erie canal.you must have heard of it.'"_nay, senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, andhereditary land, we know but little of your vigorous north.'"_aye? well then, don, refill my cup. your chicha's very fine; andere proceeding further i will tell ye what our canallers are; for suchinformation may throw side-light upon my story.'"for three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entirebreadth of the state of new york; through numerous populous cities andmost thriving villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, andaffluent, cultivated fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-roomand bar-room; through the holy-of-holies of great forests; on romanarches over indian rivers; through sun and shade; by happy hearts orbroken; through all the wide contrasting scenery of those noble mohawkcounties; and especially, by rows of snow-white chapels, whose spiresstand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream of venetianlycorrupt and often lawless life. there's your true ashantee, gentlemen;there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches.for by some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitanfreebooters that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, sosinners, gentlemen, most abound in holiest vicinities."_is that a friar passing?' said don pedro, looking downwards intothe crowded plazza, with humorous concern."_well for our northern friend, dame isabella's inquisition wanesin lima,' laughed don sebastian. _proceed, senor.'"_a moment! pardon!' cried another of the company. _in the nameof all us limeese, i but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that wehave by no means overlooked your delicacy in not substituting presentlima for distant venice in your corrupt comparison. oh! do not bow andlook surprised; you know the proverb all along this coast_"corruptas lima." it but bears out your saying, too; churches more plentifulthan billiard-tables, and for ever open_and "corrupt as lima." so,too, venice; i have been there; the holy city of the blessed evangelist,st. mark!_st. dominic, purge it! your cup! thanks: here i refill; now,you pour out again.'"freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the canaller wouldmake a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked ishe. like mark antony, for days and days along his green-turfed,flowery nile, he indolently floats, openly toying with his red-cheekedcleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck. but ashore,all this effeminacy is dashed. the brigandish guise which the canallerso proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-ribboned hat betoken his grandfeatures. a terror to the smiling innocence of the villages throughwhich he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are not unshunnedin cities. once a vagabond on his own canal, i have received good turnsfrom one of these canallers; i thank him heartily; would fain be notungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of yourman of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poorstranger in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. in sum, gentlemen,what the wildness of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced bythis; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of its most finishedgraduates, and that scarce any race of mankind, except sydney men, areso much distrusted by our whaling captains. nor does it at all diminishthe curiousness of this matter, that to many thousands of our rural boysand young men born along its line, the probationary life of the grandcanal furnishes the sole transition between quietly reaping in achristian corn-field, and recklessly ploughing the waters of the mostbarbaric seas."_i see! i see!' impetuously exclaimed don pedro, spilling hischicha upon his silvery ruffles. _no need to travel! the world's onelima. i had thought, now, that at your temperate north the generationswere cold and holy as the hills._but the story.'"i left off, gentlemen, where the lakeman shook the backstay. hardlyhad he done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and thefour harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. but sliding down theropes like baleful comets, the two canallers rushed into the uproar, andsought to drag their man out of it towards the forecastle. others of thesailors joined with them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued;while standing out of harm's way, the valiant captain danced up anddown with a whale-pike, calling upon his officers to manhandle thatatrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along to the quarter-deck. atintervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of the confusion,and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick out theobject of his resentment. but steelkilt and his desperadoes were toomuch for them all; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where,hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line withthe windlass, these sea-parisians entrenched themselves behind thebarricade."_come out of that, ye pirates!' roared the captain, now menacingthem with a pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward._come out of that, ye cut-throats!'"steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and downthere, defied the worst the pistols could do; but gave the captainto understand distinctly, that his (steelkilt's) death would be thesignal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands. fearing in hisheart lest this might prove but too true, the captain a little desisted,but still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to their duty."_will you promise not to touch us, if we do?' demanded theirringleader."_turn to! turn to!_i make no promise;_to your duty! do you wantto sink the ship, by knocking off at a time like this? turn to!' andhe once more raised a pistol."_sink the ship?' cried steelkilt. _aye, let her sink. not a manof us turns to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us.what say ye, men?' turning to his comrades. a fierce cheer was theirresponse."the lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping hiseye on the captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:__it'snot our fault; we didn't want it; i told him to take his hammer away;it was boy's business; he might have known me before this; i told himnot to prick the buffalo; i believe i have broken a finger here againsthis cursed jaw; ain't those mincing knives down in the forecastlethere, men? look to those handspikes, my hearties. captain, by god,look to yourself; say the word; don't be a fool; forget it all; weare ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we're your men; but wewon't be flogged.'"_turn to! i make no promises, turn to, i say!'"_look ye, now,' cried the lakeman, flinging out his arm towardshim, _there are a few of us here (and i am one of them) who haveshipped for the cruise, d'ye see; now as you well know, sir, we canclaim our discharge as soon as the anchor is down; so we don't want arow; it's not our interest; we want to be peaceable; we are ready towork, but we won't be flogged.'"_turn to!' roared the captain."steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:__i tell youwhat it is now, captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such ashabby rascal, we won't lift a hand against ye unless ye attackus; but till you say the word about not flogging us, we don't do ahand's turn.'"_down into the forecastle then, down with ye, i'll keep ye theretill ye're sick of it. down ye go.'"_shall we?' cried the ringleader to his men. most of them wereagainst it; but at length, in obedience to steelkilt, they preceded himdown into their dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into acave."as the lakeman's bare head was just level with the planks, thecaptain and his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over theslide of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudlycalled for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to thecompanionway."then opening the slide a little, the captain whispered somethingdown the crack, closed it, and turned the key upon them_ten innumber_leaving on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had remainedneutral."all night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forwardand aft, especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway;at which last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge, afterbreaking through the bulkhead below. but the hours of darkness passedin peace; the men who still remained at their duty toiling hard at thepumps, whose clinking and clanking at intervals through the dreary nightdismally resounded through the ship."at sunrise the captain went forward, and knocking on the deck,summoned the prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. waterwas then lowered down to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit weretossed after it; when again turning the key upon them and pocketing it,the captain returned to the quarter-deck. twice every day for three daysthis was repeated; but on the fourth morning a confused wrangling, andthen a scuffling was heard, as the customary summons was delivered; andsuddenly four men burst up from the forecastle, saying they were readyto turn to. the fetid closeness of the air, and a famishing diet, unitedperhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution, had constrained them tosurrender at discretion. emboldened by this, the captain reiterated hisdemand to the rest, but steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific hint tostop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged. on the fifthmorning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from thedesperate arms below that sought to restrain them. only three were left."_better turn to, now?' said the captain with a heartless jeer."_shut us up again, will ye!' cried steelkilt."_oh certainly,' said the captain, and the key clicked."it was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection ofseven of his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that hadlast hailed him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as blackas the bowels of despair; it was then that steelkilt proposed to thetwo canallers, thus far apparently of one mind with him, to burst out oftheir hole at the next summoning of the garrison; and armed with theirkeen mincing knives (long, crescentic, heavy implements with a handleat each end) run amuck from the bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by anydevilishness of desperation possible, seize the ship. for himself, hewould do this, he said, whether they joined him or not. that was thelast night he should spend in that den. but the scheme met with noopposition on the part of the other two; they swore they were ready forthat, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a surrender.and what was more, they each insisted upon being the first man on deck,when the time to make the rush should come. but to this their leader asfiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly ashis two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the matter;and both of them could not be first, for the ladder would but admit oneman at a time. and here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreantsmust come out."upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his ownseparate soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same pieceof treachery, namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to bethe first of the three, though the last of the ten, to surrender; andthereby secure whatever small chance of pardon such conduct might merit.but when steelkilt made known his determination still to lead them tothe last, they in some way, by some subtle chemistry of villany, mixedtheir before secret treacheries together; and when their leaderfell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in threesentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with cords;and shrieked out for the captain at midnight."thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, heand all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. in afew minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the stillstruggling ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidiousallies, who at once claimed the honour of securing a man who had beenfully ripe for murder. but all these were collared, and dragged alongthe deck like dead cattle; and, side by side, were seized up into themizzen rigging, like three quarters of meat, and there they hung tillmorning. _damn ye,' cried the captain, pacing to and fro beforethem, _the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!'"at sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who hadrebelled from those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told theformer that he had a good mind to flog them all round_thought, uponthe whole, he would do so_he ought to_justice demanded it; but forthe present, considering their timely surrender, he would let them gowith a reprimand, which he accordingly administered in the vernacular."_but as for you, ye carrion rogues,' turning to the three menin the rigging__for you, i mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;'and, seizing a rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs ofthe two traitors, till they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung theirheads sideways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn."_my wrist is sprained with ye!' he cried, at last; _but thereis still rope enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn't giveup. take that gag from his mouth, and let us hear what he can say forhimself.'"for a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of hiscramped jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a sortof hiss, _what i say is this_and mind it well_if you flog me, imurder you!'"_say ye so? then see how ye frighten me'_and the captain drewoff with the rope to strike."_best not,' hissed the lakeman."_but i must,'_and the rope was once more drawn back for thestroke."steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but thecaptain; who, to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced thedeck rapidly two or three times, and then suddenly throwing down hisrope, said, _i won't do it_let him go_cut him down: d'yehear?'"but as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a paleman, with a bandaged head, arrested them_radney the chief mate. eversince the blow, he had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing thetumult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far had watched the wholescene. such was the state of his mouth, that he could hardly speak;but mumbling something about his being willing and able to do what thecaptain dared not attempt, he snatched the rope and advanced to hispinioned foe."_you are a coward!' hissed the lakeman."_so i am, but take that.' the mate was in the very act ofstriking, when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. he paused: andthen pausing no more, made good his word, spite of steelkilt's threat,whatever that might have been. the three men were then cut down, allhands were turned to, and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the ironpumps clanged as before."just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamorwas heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up,besieged the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew.entreaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their owninstance they were put down in the ship's run for salvation. still,no sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest. on the contrary, it seemed,that mainly at steelkilt's instigation, they had resolved to maintainthe strictest peacefulness, obey all orders to the last, and, when theship reached port, desert her in a body. but in order to insure thespeediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to another thing_namely,not to sing out for whales, in case any should be discovered. for,spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the town-ho stillmaintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing tolower for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck thecruising ground; and radney the mate was quite as ready to change hisberth for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death thevital jaw of the whale."but though the lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort ofpassiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till allwas over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the man whohad stung him in the ventricles of his heart. he was in radney the chiefmate's watch; and as if the infatuated man sought to run more thanhalf way to meet his doom, after the scene at the rigging, he insisted,against the express counsel of the captain, upon resuming the headof his watch at night. upon this, and one or two other circumstances,steelkilt systematically built the plan of his revenge."during the night, radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on thebulwarks of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale ofthe boat which was hoisted up there, a little above the ship's side.in this attitude, it was well known, he sometimes dozed. there was aconsiderable vacancy between the boat and the ship, and down betweenthis was the sea. steelkilt calculated his time, and found that his nexttrick at the helm would come round at two o'clock, in the morning ofthe third day from that in which he had been betrayed. at his leisure,he employed the interval in braiding something very carefully in hiswatches below."_what are you making there?' said a shipmate."_what do you think? what does it look like?'"_like a lanyard for your bag; but it's an odd one, seems tome.'"_yes, rather oddish,' said the lakeman, holding it at arm'slength before him; _but i think it will answer. shipmate, i haven'tenough twine,_have you any?'"but there was none in the forecastle."_then i must get some from old rad;' and he rose to go aft."_you don't mean to go a begging to him!' said a sailor."_why not? do you think he won't do me a turn, when it's to helphimself in the end, shipmate?' and going to the mate, he looked at himquietly, and asked him for some twine to mend his hammock. it was givenhim_neither twine nor lanyard were seen again; but the next nightan iron ball, closely netted, partly rolled from the pocket of thelakeman's monkey jacket, as he was tucking the coat into hishammock for a pillow. twenty-four hours after, his trick at the silenthelm_nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave always readydug to the seaman's hand_that fatal hour was then to come; and inthe fore-ordaining soul of steelkilt, the mate was already stark andstretched as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in."but, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloodydeed he had planned. yet complete revenge he had, and without being theavenger. for by a mysterious fatality, heaven itself seemed to step into take out of his hands into its own the damning thing he would havedone."it was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the secondday, when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid teneriffe man,drawing water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, _there sherolls! there she rolls!' jesu, what a whale! it was moby dick."_moby dick!' cried don sebastian; _st. dominic! sir sailor, butdo whales have christenings? whom call you moby dick?'"_a very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster,don;_but that would be too long a story.'"_how? how?' cried all the young spaniards, crowding."_nay, dons, dons_nay, nay! i cannot rehearse that now. let me getmore into the air, sirs.'"_the chicha! the chicha!' cried don pedro; _our vigorous friendlooks faint;_fill up his empty glass!'"no need, gentlemen; one moment, and i proceed._now, gentlemen,so suddenly perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of theship_forgetful of the compact among the crew_in the excitement ofthe moment, the teneriffe man had instinctively and involuntarily liftedhis voice for the monster, though for some little time past it had beenplainly beheld from the three sullen mast-heads. all was now a phrensy._the white whale_the white whale!' was the cry from captain,mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were allanxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged creweyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milkymass, that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistenedlike a living opal in the blue morning sea. gentlemen, a strangefatality pervades the whole career of these events, as if verily mappedout before the world itself was charted. the mutineer was the bowsmanof the mate, and when fast to a fish, it was his duty to sit next him,while radney stood up with his lance in the prow, and haul in or slackenthe line, at the word of command. moreover, when the four boats werelowered, the mate's got the start; and none howled more fiercely withdelight than did steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. after a stiffpull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, radney sprang tothe bow. he was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat. and now hisbandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale's topmost back. nothingloath, his bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam thatblent two whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck asagainst a sunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standingmate. that instant, as he fell on the whale's slippery back, the boatrighted, and was dashed aside by the swell, while radney was tossed overinto the sea, on the other flank of the whale. he struck out throughthe spray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen through that veil, wildlyseeking to remove himself from the eye of moby dick. but the whalerushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer between his jaws;and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and went down."meantime, at the first tap of the boat's bottom, the lakeman hadslackened the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmlylooking on, he thought his own thoughts. but a sudden, terrific,downward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. hecut it; and the whale was free. but, at some distance, moby dick roseagain, with some tatters of radney's red woollen shirt, caught in theteeth that had destroyed him. all four boats gave chase again; but thewhale eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared."in good time, the town-ho reached her port_a savage, solitaryplace_where no civilized creature resided. there, headed by thelakeman, all but five or six of the foremastmen deliberately desertedamong the palms; eventually, as it turned out, seizing a large doublewar-canoe of the savages, and setting sail for some other harbor."the ship's company being reduced to but a handful, the captaincalled upon the islanders to assist him in the laborious business ofheaving down the ship to stop the leak. but to such unresting vigilanceover their dangerous allies was this small band of whites necessitated,both by night and by day, and so extreme was the hard work theyunderwent, that upon the vessel being ready again for sea, they were insuch a weakened condition that the captain durst not put off withthem in so heavy a vessel. after taking counsel with his officers, heanchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran out histwo cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warningthe islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one manwith him, and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straightbefore the wind for tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure areinforcement to his crew."on the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was descried, whichseemed to have touched at a low isle of corals. he steered away from it;but the savage craft bore down on him; and soon the voice of steelkilthailed him to heave to, or he would run him under water. the captainpresented a pistol. with one foot on each prow of the yoked war-canoes,the lakeman laughed him to scorn; assuring him that if the pistol somuch as clicked in the lock, he would bury him in bubbles and foam."_what do you want of me?' cried the captain."_where are you bound? and for what are you bound?' demandedsteelkilt; _no lies.'"_i am bound to tahiti for more men.'"_very good. let me board you a moment_i come in peace.' withthat he leaped from the canoe, swam to the boat; and climbing thegunwale, stood face to face with the captain."_cross your arms, sir; throw back your head. now, repeat after me.as soon as steelkilt leaves me, i swear to beach this boat on yonderisland, and remain there six days. if i do not, may lightning strikeme!'"_a pretty scholar,' laughed the lakeman. _adios, senor!' andleaping into the sea, he swam back to his comrades."watching the boat till it was fairly beached, and drawn up to theroots of the cocoa-nut trees, steelkilt made sail again, and in due timearrived at tahiti, his own place of destination. there, luck befriendedhim; two ships were about to sail for france, and were providentiallyin want of precisely that number of men which the sailor headed. theyembarked; and so for ever got the start of their former captain, had hebeen at all minded to work them legal retribution."some ten days after the french ships sailed, the whale-boat arrived,and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more civilizedtahitians, who had been somewhat used to the sea. chartering a smallnative schooner, he returned with them to his vessel; and finding allright there, again resumed his cruisings."where steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know; but upon the island ofnantucket, the widow of radney still turns to the sea which refusesto give up its dead; still in dreams sees the awful white whale thatdestroyed him."_are you through?' said don sebastian, quietly."_i am, don.'"_then i entreat you, tell me if to the best of your ownconvictions, this your story is in substance really true? it is sopassing wonderful! did you get it from an unquestionable source? bearwith me if i seem to press.'"_also bear with all of us, sir sailor; for we all join in donsebastian's suit,' cried the company, with exceeding interest."_is there a copy of the holy evangelists in the golden inn,gentlemen?'"_nay,' said don sebastian; _but i know a worthy priest nearby, who will quickly procure one for me. i go for it; but are you welladvised? this may grow too serious.'"_will you be so good as to bring the priest also, don?'"_though there are no auto-da-fe's in lima now,' said one ofthe company to another; _i fear our sailor friend runs risk of thearchiepiscopacy. let us withdraw more out of the moonlight. i see noneed of this.'"_excuse me for running after you, don sebastian; but may i also begthat you will be particular in procuring the largest sized evangelistsyou can.'"_this is the priest, he brings you the evangelists,' said donsebastian, gravely, returning with a tall and solemn figure."_let me remove my hat. now, venerable priest, further into thelight, and hold the holy book before me that i may touch it."_so help me heaven, and on my honour the story i have told ye,gentlemen, is in substance and its great items, true. i know it to betrue; it happened on this ball; i trod the ship; i knew the crew; i haveseen and talked with steelkilt since the death of radney.'"chapter 55. of the monstrous pictures of whales.i shall ere long paint to you as well as one can without canvas,something like the true form of the whale as he actually appears to theeye of the whaleman when in his own absolute body the whale is mooredalongside the whale-ship so that he can be fairly stepped upon there.it may be worth while, therefore, previously to advert to thosecurious imaginary portraits of him which even down to the present dayconfidently challenge the faith of the landsman. it is time to set theworld right in this matter, by proving such pictures of the whale allwrong.it may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusions willbe found among the oldest hindoo, egyptian, and grecian sculptures. forever since those inventive but unscrupulous times when on the marblepanellings of temples, the pedestals of statues, and on shields,medallions, cups, and coins, the dolphin was drawn in scales ofchain-armor like saladin's, and a helmeted head like st. george's;ever since then has something of the same sort of license prevailed,not only in most popular pictures of the whale, but in many scientificpresentations of him.now, by all odds, the most ancient extant portrait anyways purportingto be the whale's, is to be found in the famous cavern-pagoda ofelephanta, in india. the brahmins maintain that in the almost endlesssculptures of that immemorial pagoda, all the trades and pursuits, everyconceivable avocation of man, were prefigured ages before any of themactually came into being. no wonder then, that in some sort our nobleprofession of whaling should have been there shadowed forth. thehindoo whale referred to, occurs in a separate department of the wall,depicting the incarnation of vishnu in the form of leviathan, learnedlyknown as the matse avatar. but though this sculpture is half man andhalf whale, so as only to give the tail of the latter, yet that smallsection of him is all wrong. it looks more like the tapering tail of ananaconda, than the broad palms of the true whale's majestic flukes.but go to the old galleries, and look now at a great christianpainter's portrait of this fish; for he succeeds no better thanthe antediluvian hindoo. it is guido's picture of perseus rescuingandromeda from the sea-monster or whale. where did guido get the modelof such a strange creature as that? nor does hogarth, in paintingthe same scene in his own "perseus descending," make out one whitbetter. the huge corpulence of that hogarthian monster undulates on thesurface, scarcely drawing one inch of water. it has a sort of howdahon its back, and its distended tusked mouth into which the billows arerolling, might be taken for the traitors' gate leading from the thamesby water into the tower. then, there are the prodromus whales of oldscotch sibbald, and jonah's whale, as depicted in the prints of oldbibles and the cuts of old primers. what shall be said of these? as forthe book-binder's whale winding like a vine-stalk round the stock ofa descending anchor_as stamped and gilded on the backs and title-pagesof many books both old and new_that is a very picturesque but purelyfabulous creature, imitated, i take it, from the like figures on antiquevases. though universally denominated a dolphin, i nevertheless callthis book-binder's fish an attempt at a whale; because it was sointended when the device was first introduced. it was introduced byan old italian publisher somewhere about the 15th century, during therevival of learning; and in those days, and even down to a comparativelylate period, dolphins were popularly supposed to be a species of theleviathan.in the vignettes and other embellishments of some ancient books you willat times meet with very curious touches at the whale, where all mannerof spouts, jets d'eau, hot springs and cold, saratoga and baden-baden,come bubbling up from his unexhausted brain. in the title-page of theoriginal edition of the "advancement of learning" you will find somecurious whales.but quitting all these unprofessional attempts, let us glance at thosepictures of leviathan purporting to be sober, scientific delineations,by those who know. in old harris's collection of voyages there aresome plates of whales extracted from a dutch book of voyages, a.d. 1671,entitled "a whaling voyage to spitzbergen in the ship jonas in thewhale, peter peterson of friesland, master." in one of those platesthe whales, like great rafts of logs, are represented lying amongice-isles, with white bears running over their living backs. in anotherplate, the prodigious blunder is made of representing the whale withperpendicular flukes.then again, there is an imposing quarto, written by one captain colnett,a post captain in the english navy, entitled "a voyage round cape horninto the south seas, for the purpose of extending the spermaceti whalefisheries." in this book is an outline purporting to be a "pictureof a physeter or spermaceti whale, drawn by scale from one killed on thecoast of mexico, august, 1793, and hoisted on deck." i doubt not thecaptain had this veracious picture taken for the benefit of his marines.to mention but one thing about it, let me say that it has an eye whichapplied, according to the accompanying scale, to a full grown spermwhale, would make the eye of that whale a bow-window some five feetlong. ah, my gallant captain, why did ye not give us jonah looking outof that eye!nor are the most conscientious compilations of natural history forthe benefit of the young and tender, free from the same heinousness ofmistake. look at that popular work "goldsmith's animated nature."in the abridged london edition of 1807, there are plates of an alleged"whale" and a "narwhale." i do not wish to seem inelegant, butthis unsightly whale looks much like an amputated sow; and, as forthe narwhale, one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that in thisnineteenth century such a hippogriff could be palmed for genuine uponany intelligent public of schoolboys.then, again, in 1825, bernard germain, count de lacepede, a greatnaturalist, published a scientific systemized whale book, wherein areseveral pictures of the different species of the leviathan. all theseare not only incorrect, but the picture of the mysticetus or greenlandwhale (that is to say, the right whale), even scoresby, a longexperienced man as touching that species, declares not to have itscounterpart in nature.but the placing of the cap-sheaf to all this blundering business wasreserved for the scientific frederick cuvier, brother to the famousbaron. in 1836, he published a natural history of whales, in which hegives what he calls a picture of the sperm whale. before showing thatpicture to any nantucketer, you had best provide for your summaryretreat from nantucket. in a word, frederick cuvier's sperm whale isnot a sperm whale, but a squash. of course, he never had the benefitof a whaling voyage (such men seldom have), but whence he derived thatpicture, who can tell? perhaps he got it as his scientific predecessorin the same field, desmarest, got one of his authentic abortions; thatis, from a chinese drawing. and what sort of lively lads with the pencilthose chinese are, many queer cups and saucers inform us.as for the sign-painters' whales seen in the streets hanging over theshops of oil-dealers, what shall be said of them? they are generallyrichard iii. whales, with dromedary humps, and very savage; breakfastingon three or four sailor tarts, that is whaleboats full of mariners:their deformities floundering in seas of blood and blue paint.but these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are not so verysurprising after all. consider! most of the scientific drawings havebeen taken from the stranded fish; and these are about as correct as adrawing of a wrecked ship, with broken back, would correctly representthe noble animal itself in all its undashed pride of hull and spars.though elephants have stood for their full-lengths, the living leviathanhas never yet fairly floated himself for his portrait. the living whale,in his full majesty and significance, is only to be seen at sea inunfathomable waters; and afloat the vast bulk of him is out of sight,like a launched line-of-battle ship; and out of that element it is athing eternally impossible for mortal man to hoist him bodily into theair, so as to preserve all his mighty swells and undulations. and, notto speak of the highly presumable difference of contour between a youngsucking whale and a full-grown platonian leviathan; yet, even in thecase of one of those young sucking whales hoisted to a ship's deck,such is then the outlandish, eel-like, limbered, varying shape of him,that his precise expression the devil himself could not catch.but it may be fancied, that from the naked skeleton of the strandedwhale, accurate hints may be derived touching his true form. not at all.for it is one of the more curious things about this leviathan, thathis skeleton gives very little idea of his general shape. though jeremybentham's skeleton, which hangs for candelabra in the library ofone of his executors, correctly conveys the idea of a burly-browedutilitarian old gentleman, with all jeremy's other leading personalcharacteristics; yet nothing of this kind could be inferred from anyleviathan's articulated bones. in fact, as the great hunter says, themere skeleton of the whale bears the same relation to the fully investedand padded animal as the insect does to the chrysalis that so roundinglyenvelopes it. this peculiarity is strikingly evinced in the head, asin some part of this book will be incidentally shown. it is also verycuriously displayed in the side fin, the bones of which almost exactlyanswer to the bones of the human hand, minus only the thumb. this finhas four regular bone-fingers, the index, middle, ring, and littlefinger. but all these are permanently lodged in their fleshy covering,as the human fingers in an artificial covering. "however recklesslythe whale may sometimes serve us," said humorous stubb one day, "hecan never be truly said to handle us without mittens."for all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it, you must needsconclude that the great leviathan is that one creature in the worldwhich must remain unpainted to the last. true, one portrait may hitthe mark much nearer than another, but none can hit it with any veryconsiderable degree of exactness. so there is no earthly way of findingout precisely what the whale really looks like. and the only mode inwhich you can derive even a tolerable idea of his living contour, isby going a whaling yourself; but by so doing, you run no small risk ofbeing eternally stove and sunk by him. wherefore, it seems to me you hadbest not be too fastidious in your curiosity touching this leviathan.chapter 56. of the less erroneous pictures of whales, and the truepictures of whaling scenes.in connexion with the monstrous pictures of whales, i am stronglytempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous stories ofthem which are to be found in certain books, both ancient and modern,especially in pliny, purchas, hackluyt, harris, cuvier, etc. but i passthat matter by.i know of only four published outlines of the great sperm whale;colnett's, huggins's, frederick cuvier's, and beale's. in theprevious chapter colnett and cuvier have been referred to. huggins'sis far better than theirs; but, by great odds, beale's is the best.all beale's drawings of this whale are good, excepting the middlefigure in the picture of three whales in various attitudes, capping hissecond chapter. his frontispiece, boats attacking sperm whales, thoughno doubt calculated to excite the civil scepticism of some parlor men,is admirably correct and life-like in its general effect. some of thesperm whale drawings in j. ross browne are pretty correct in contour;but they are wretchedly engraved. that is not his fault though.of the right whale, the best outline pictures are in scoresby; but theyare drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable impression. he hasbut one picture of whaling scenes, and this is a sad deficiency, becauseit is by such pictures only, when at all well done, that you can deriveanything like a truthful idea of the living whale as seen by his livinghunters.but, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in some detailsnot the most correct, presentations of whales and whaling scenes tobe anywhere found, are two large french engravings, well executed,and taken from paintings by one garnery. respectively, they representattacks on the sperm and right whale. in the first engraving a noblesperm whale is depicted in full majesty of might, just risen beneaththe boat from the profundities of the ocean, and bearing high in the airupon his back the terrific wreck of the stoven planks. the prow ofthe boat is partially unbroken, and is drawn just balancing upon themonster's spine; and standing in that prow, for that one singleincomputable flash of time, you behold an oarsman, half shrouded by theincensed boiling spout of the whale, and in the act of leaping, as iffrom a precipice. the action of the whole thing is wonderfully good andtrue. the half-emptied line-tub floats on the whitened sea; the woodenpoles of the spilled harpoons obliquely bob in it; the heads of theswimming crew are scattered about the whale in contrasting expressionsof affright; while in the black stormy distance the ship is bearing downupon the scene. serious fault might be found with the anatomical detailsof this whale, but let that pass; since, for the life of me, i could notdraw so good a one.in the second engraving, the boat is in the act of drawing alongsidethe barnacled flank of a large running right whale, that rolls his blackweedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from the patagoniancliffs. his jets are erect, full, and black like soot; so that from soabounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think there must be a bravesupper cooking in the great bowels below. sea fowls are pecking at thesmall crabs, shell-fish, and other sea candies and maccaroni, which theright whale sometimes carries on his pestilent back. and all the whilethe thick-lipped leviathan is rushing through the deep, leaving tons oftumultuous white curds in his wake, and causing the slight boat to rockin the swells like a skiff caught nigh the paddle-wheels of an oceansteamer. thus, the foreground is all raging commotion; but behind, inadmirable artistic contrast, is the glassy level of a sea becalmed, thedrooping unstarched sails of the powerless ship, and the inert mass ofa dead whale, a conquered fortress, with the flag of capture lazilyhanging from the whale-pole inserted into his spout-hole.who garnery the painter is, or was, i know not. but my life for it hewas either practically conversant with his subject, or else marvellouslytutored by some experienced whaleman. the french are the lads forpainting action. go and gaze upon all the paintings of europe, andwhere will you find such a gallery of living and breathing commotionon canvas, as in that triumphal hall at versailles; where the beholderfights his way, pell-mell, through the consecutive great battles offrance; where every sword seems a flash of the northern lights, and thesuccessive armed kings and emperors dash by, like a charge of crownedcentaurs? not wholly unworthy of a place in that gallery, are these seabattle-pieces of garnery.the natural aptitude of the french for seizing the picturesqueness ofthings seems to be peculiarly evinced in what paintings and engravingsthey have of their whaling scenes. with not one tenth of england'sexperience in the fishery, and not the thousandth part of that of theamericans, they have nevertheless furnished both nations with the onlyfinished sketches at all capable of conveying the real spirit ofthe whale hunt. for the most part, the english and american whaledraughtsmen seem entirely content with presenting the mechanical outlineof things, such as the vacant profile of the whale; which, so far aspicturesqueness of effect is concerned, is about tantamount to sketchingthe profile of a pyramid. even scoresby, the justly renowned rightwhaleman, after giving us a stiff full length of the greenland whale,and three or four delicate miniatures of narwhales and porpoises, treatsus to a series of classical engravings of boat hooks, chopping knives,and grapnels; and with the microscopic diligence of a leuwenhoecksubmits to the inspection of a shivering world ninety-six fac-similes ofmagnified arctic snow crystals. i mean no disparagement to the excellentvoyager (i honour him for a veteran), but in so important a matter itwas certainly an oversight not to have procured for every crystal asworn affidavit taken before a greenland justice of the peace.in addition to those fine engravings from garnery, there are two otherfrench engravings worthy of note, by some one who subscribes himself"h. durand." one of them, though not precisely adapted to ourpresent purpose, nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts. itis a quiet noon-scene among the isles of the pacific; a french whaleranchored, inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking water on board; theloosened sails of the ship, and the long leaves of the palms in thebackground, both drooping together in the breezeless air. the effect isvery fine, when considered with reference to its presenting the hardyfishermen under one of their few aspects of oriental repose. the otherengraving is quite a different affair: the ship hove-to upon the opensea, and in the very heart of the leviathanic life, with a right whalealongside; the vessel (in the act of cutting-in) hove over to themonster as if to a quay; and a boat, hurriedly pushing off from thisscene of activity, is about giving chase to whales in the distance. theharpoons and lances lie levelled for use; three oarsmen are just settingthe mast in its hole; while from a sudden roll of the sea, the littlecraft stands half-erect out of the water, like a rearing horse. from theship, the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is going up likethe smoke over a village of smithies; and to windward, a black cloud,rising up with earnest of squalls and rains, seems to quicken theactivity of the excited seamen.chapter 57. of whales in paint; in teeth; in wood; in sheet-iron; instone; in mountains; in stars.on tower-hill, as you go down to the london docks, you may have seen acrippled beggar (or kedger, as the sailors say) holding a painted boardbefore him, representing the tragic scene in which he lost his leg.there are three whales and three boats; and one of the boats (presumedto contain the missing leg in all its original integrity) is beingcrunched by the jaws of the foremost whale. any time these ten years,they tell me, has that man held up that picture, and exhibited thatstump to an incredulous world. but the time of his justification hasnow come. his three whales are as good whales as were ever published inwapping, at any rate; and his stump as unquestionable a stump as any youwill find in the western clearings. but, though for ever mounted onthat stump, never a stump-speech does the poor whaleman make; but, withdowncast eyes, stands ruefully contemplating his own amputation.throughout the pacific, and also in nantucket, and new bedford, andsag harbor, you will come across lively sketches of whales andwhaling-scenes, graven by the fishermen themselves on sperm whale-teeth,or ladies' busks wrought out of the right whale-bone, and otherlike skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call the numerous littleingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out of the rough material,in their hours of ocean leisure. some of them have little boxesof dentistical-looking implements, specially intended for theskrimshandering business. but, in general, they toil with theirjack-knives alone; and, with that almost omnipotent tool of the sailor,they will turn you out anything you please, in the way of a mariner'sfancy.long exile from christendom and civilization inevitably restores a manto that condition in which god placed him, i.e. what is called savagery.your true whale-hunter is as much a savage as an iroquois. i myself am asavage, owning no allegiance but to the king of the cannibals; and readyat any moment to rebel against him.now, one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in his domestichours, is his wonderful patience of industry. an ancient hawaiianwar-club or spear-paddle, in its full multiplicity and elaboration ofcarving, is as great a trophy of human perseverance as a latin lexicon.for, with but a bit of broken sea-shell or a shark's tooth, thatmiraculous intricacy of wooden net-work has been achieved; and it hascost steady years of steady application.as with the hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor-savage. with thesame marvellous patience, and with the same single shark's tooth, ofhis one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit of bone sculpture, notquite as workmanlike, but as close packed in its maziness of design, asthe greek savage, achilles's shield; and full of barbaric spirit andsuggestiveness, as the prints of that fine old dutch savage, albertdurer.wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out of the small dark slabs ofthe noble south sea war-wood, are frequently met with in the forecastlesof american whalers. some of them are done with much accuracy.at some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whales hungby the tail for knockers to the road-side door. when the porter issleepy, the anvil-headed whale would be best. but these knockingwhales are seldom remarkable as faithful essays. on the spires of someold-fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed there forweather-cocks; but they are so elevated, and besides that are to allintents and purposes so labelled with "hands off!" you cannotexamine them closely enough to decide upon their merit.in bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base of high brokencliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon theplain, you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of theleviathan partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaks againstthem in a surf of green surges.then, again, in mountainous countries where the traveller is continuallygirdled by amphitheatrical heights; here and there from some luckypoint of view you will catch passing glimpses of the profiles ofwhales defined along the undulating ridges. but you must be a thoroughwhaleman, to see these sights; and not only that, but if you wishto return to such a sight again, you must be sure and take the exactintersecting latitude and longitude of your first stand-point, elseso chance-like are such observations of the hills, that your precise,previous stand-point would require a laborious re-discovery; like thesoloma islands, which still remain incognita, though once high-ruffedmendanna trod them and old figuera chronicled them.nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you fail to trace outgreat whales in the starry heavens, and boats in pursuit of them; aswhen long filled with thoughts of war the eastern nations saw armieslocked in battle among the clouds. thus at the north have i chasedleviathan round and round the pole with the revolutions of the brightpoints that first defined him to me. and beneath the effulgent antarcticskies i have boarded the argo-navis, and joined the chase against thestarry cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of hydrus and the flyingfish.with a frigate's anchors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of harpoonsfor spurs, would i could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies, tosee whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tents really lieencamped beyond my mortal sight!chapter 58. brit.steering north-eastward from the crozetts, we fell in with vast meadowsof brit, the minute, yellow substance, upon which the right whalelargely feeds. for leagues and leagues it undulated round us, so that weseemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe and golden wheat.on the second day, numbers of right whales were seen, who, secure fromthe attack of a sperm whaler like the pequod, with open jaws sluggishlyswam through the brit, which, adhering to the fringing fibres of thatwondrous venetian blind in their mouths, was in that manner separatedfrom the water that escaped at the lip.as morning mowers, who side by side slowly and seethingly advancetheir scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads; even so thesemonsters swam, making a strange, grassy, cutting sound; and leavingbehind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea.**that part of the sea known among whalemen as the "brazil banks"does not bear that name as the banks of newfoundland do, because ofthere being shallows and soundings there, but because of this remarkablemeadow-like appearance, caused by the vast drifts of brit continuallyfloating in those latitudes, where the right whale is often chased.but it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at allreminded one of mowers. seen from the mast-heads, especially when theypaused and were stationary for a while, their vast black forms lookedmore like lifeless masses of rock than anything else. and as in thegreat hunting countries of india, the stranger at a distance willsometimes pass on the plains recumbent elephants without knowing themto be such, taking them for bare, blackened elevations of the soil; evenso, often, with him, who for the first time beholds this species of theleviathans of the sea. and even when recognised at last, their immensemagnitude renders it very hard really to believe that such bulky massesof overgrowth can possibly be instinct, in all parts, with the same sortof life that lives in a dog or a horse.indeed, in other respects, you can hardly regard any creatures of thedeep with the same feelings that you do those of the shore. for thoughsome old naturalists have maintained that all creatures of the land areof their kind in the sea; and though taking a broad general view ofthe thing, this may very well be; yet coming to specialties, where, forexample, does the ocean furnish any fish that in disposition answers tothe sagacious kindness of the dog? the accursed shark alone can in anygeneric respect be said to bear comparative analogy to him.but though, to landsmen in general, the native inhabitants of theseas have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial andrepelling; though we know the sea to be an everlasting terra incognita,so that columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to discover hisone superficial western one; though, by vast odds, the most terrificof all mortal disasters have immemorially and indiscriminately befallentens and hundreds of thousands of those who have gone upon the waters;though but a moment's consideration will teach, that however baby manmay brag of his science and skill, and however much, in a flatteringfuture, that science and skill may augment; yet for ever and for ever,to the crack of doom, the sea will insult and murder him, and pulverizethe stateliest, stiffest frigate he can make; nevertheless, by thecontinual repetition of these very impressions, man has lost that senseof the full awfulness of the sea which aboriginally belongs to it.the first boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with portuguesevengeance had whelmed a whole world without leaving so much as a widow.that same ocean rolls now; that same ocean destroyed the wrecked shipsof last year. yea, foolish mortals, noah's flood is not yet subsided;two thirds of the fair world it yet covers.wherein differ the sea and the land, that a miracle upon one is not amiracle upon the other? preternatural terrors rested upon the hebrews,when under the feet of korah and his company the live ground openedand swallowed them up for ever; yet not a modern sun ever sets, but inprecisely the same manner the live sea swallows up ships and crews.but not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien to it, but itis also a fiend to its own off-spring; worse than the persian host whomurdered his own guests; sparing not the creatures which itself hathspawned. like a savage tigress that tossing in the jungle overlays herown cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales against the rocks,and leaves them there side by side with the split wrecks of ships. nomercy, no power but its own controls it. panting and snorting like a madbattle steed that has lost its rider, the masterless ocean overruns theglobe.consider the subtleness of the sea; how its most dreaded creatures glideunder water, unapparent for the most part, and treacherously hiddenbeneath the loveliest tints of azure. consider also the devilishbrilliance and beauty of many of its most remorseless tribes, as thedainty embellished shape of many species of sharks. consider, once more,the universal cannibalism of the sea; all whose creatures prey upon eachother, carrying on eternal war since the world began.consider all this; and then turn to this green, gentle, and most docileearth; consider them both, the sea and the land; and do you not find astrange analogy to something in yourself? for as this appalling oceansurrounds the verdant land, so in the soul of man there lies one insulartahiti, full of peace and joy, but encompassed by all the horrors of thehalf known life. god keep thee! push not off from that isle, thou canstnever return!chapter 59. squid.slowly wading through the meadows of brit, the pequod still held on herway north-eastward towards the island of java; a gentle air impellingher keel, so that in the surrounding serenity her three tall taperingmasts mildly waved to that languid breeze, as three mild palms on aplain. and still, at wide intervals in the silvery night, the lonely,alluring jet would be seen.but one transparent blue morning, when a stillness almost preternaturalspread over the sea, however unattended with any stagnant calm; whenthe long burnished sun-glade on the waters seemed a golden finger laidacross them, enjoining some secrecy; when the slippered waves whisperedtogether as they softly ran on; in this profound hush of the visiblesphere a strange spectre was seen by daggoo from the main-mast-head.in the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higher andhigher, and disentangling itself from the azure, at last gleamed beforeour prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills. thus glisteningfor a moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank. then once more arose,and silently gleamed. it seemed not a whale; and yet is this moby dick?thought daggoo. again the phantom went down, but on re-appearing oncemore, with a stiletto-like cry that startled every man from his nod,the negro yelled out_"there! there again! there she breaches! rightahead! the white whale, the white whale!"upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in swarming-time thebees rush to the boughs. bare-headed in the sultry sun, ahab stood onthe bowsprit, and with one hand pushed far behind in readiness to wavehis orders to the helmsman, cast his eager glance in the directionindicated aloft by the outstretched motionless arm of daggoo.whether the flitting attendance of the one still and solitary jet hadgradually worked upon ahab, so that he was now prepared to connect theideas of mildness and repose with the first sight of the particularwhale he pursued; however this was, or whether his eagerness betrayedhim; whichever way it might have been, no sooner did he distinctlyperceive the white mass, than with a quick intensity he instantly gaveorders for lowering.the four boats were soon on the water; ahab's in advance, and allswiftly pulling towards their prey. soon it went down, and while, withoars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance, lo! in the samespot where it sank, once more it slowly rose. almost forgetting forthe moment all thoughts of moby dick, we now gazed at the most wondrousphenomenon which the secret seas have hitherto revealed to mankind.a vast pulpy mass, furlongs in length and breadth, of a glancingcream-colour, lay floating on the water, innumerable long arms radiatingfrom its centre, and curling and twisting like a nest of anacondas, asif blindly to clutch at any hapless object within reach. no perceptibleface or front did it have; no conceivable token of either sensation orinstinct; but undulated there on the billows, an unearthly, formless,chance-like apparition of life.as with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again, starbuck stillgazing at the agitated waters where it had sunk, with a wild voiceexclaimed_"almost rather had i seen moby dick and fought him, thanto have seen thee, thou white ghost!""what was it, sir?" said flask."the great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships ever beheld,and returned to their ports to tell of it."but ahab said nothing; turning his boat, he sailed back to the vessel;the rest as silently following.whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general have connected withthe sight of this object, certain it is, that a glimpse of it beingso very unusual, that circumstance has gone far to invest it withportentousness. so rarely is it beheld, that though one and all of themdeclare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean, yet very fewof them have any but the most vague ideas concerning its true nature andform; notwithstanding, they believe it to furnish to the sperm whalehis only food. for though other species of whales find their food abovewater, and may be seen by man in the act of feeding, the spermacetiwhale obtains his whole food in unknown zones below the surface; andonly by inference is it that any one can tell of what, precisely, thatfood consists. at times, when closely pursued, he will disgorge whatare supposed to be the detached arms of the squid; some of them thusexhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length. they fancy thatthe monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily clings by them tothe bed of the ocean; and that the sperm whale, unlike other species, issupplied with teeth in order to attack and tear it.there seems some ground to imagine that the great kraken of bishoppontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into squid. the manner inwhich the bishop describes it, as alternately rising and sinking, withsome other particulars he narrates, in all this the two correspond.but much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk heassigns it.by some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysteriouscreature, here spoken of, it is included among the class of cuttle-fish,to which, indeed, in certain external respects it would seem to belong,but only as the anak of the tribe.chapter 60. the line.with reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described, as well asfor the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewhere presented,i have here to speak of the magical, sometimes horrible whale-line.the line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp, slightlyvapoured with tar, not impregnated with it, as in the case of ordinaryropes; for while tar, as ordinarily used, makes the hemp more pliable tothe rope-maker, and also renders the rope itself more convenient to thesailor for common ship use; yet, not only would the ordinary quantitytoo much stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which it mustbe subjected; but as most seamen are beginning to learn, tar in generalby no means adds to the rope's durability or strength, however much itmay give it compactness and gloss.of late years the manilla rope has in the american fishery almostentirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines; for, though notso durable as hemp, it is stronger, and far more soft and elastic; andi will add (since there is an aesthetics in all things), is much morehandsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp. hemp is a dusky, darkfellow, a sort of indian; but manilla is as a golden-haired circassianto behold.the whale-line is only two-thirds of an inch in thickness. at firstsight, you would not think it so strong as it really is. by experimentits one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight of one hundred andtwenty pounds; so that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly equalto three tons. in length, the common sperm whale-line measures somethingover two hundred fathoms. towards the stern of the boat it is spirallycoiled away in the tub, not like the worm-pipe of a still though, butso as to form one round, cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded"sheaves," or layers of concentric spiralizations, without anyhollow but the "heart," or minute vertical tube formed at the axisof the cheese. as the least tangle or kink in the coiling would, inrunning out, infallibly take somebody's arm, leg, or entire bodyoff, the utmost precaution is used in stowing the line in its tub. someharpooneers will consume almost an entire morning in this business,carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downwards through ablock towards the tub, so as in the act of coiling to free it from allpossible wrinkles and twists.in the english boats two tubs are used instead of one; the same linebeing continuously coiled in both tubs. there is some advantage in this;because these twin-tubs being so small they fit more readily into theboat, and do not strain it so much; whereas, the american tub, nearlythree feet in diameter and of proportionate depth, makes a rather bulkyfreight for a craft whose planks are but one half-inch in thickness; forthe bottom of the whale-boat is like critical ice, which will bear upa considerable distributed weight, but not very much of a concentratedone. when the painted canvas cover is clapped on the american line-tub,the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a prodigious greatwedding-cake to present to the whales.both ends of the line are exposed; the lower end terminating in aneye-splice or loop coming up from the bottom against the side of thetub, and hanging over its edge completely disengaged from everything.this arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts. first:in order to facilitate the fastening to it of an additional line from aneighboring boat, in case the stricken whale should sound so deep asto threaten to carry off the entire line originally attached to theharpoon. in these instances, the whale of course is shifted like a mugof ale, as it were, from the one boat to the other; though thefirst boat always hovers at hand to assist its consort. second: thisarrangement is indispensable for common safety's sake; for were thelower end of the line in any way attached to the boat, and were thewhale then to run the line out to the end almost in a single, smokingminute as he sometimes does, he would not stop there, for the doomedboat would infallibly be dragged down after him into the profundity ofthe sea; and in that case no town-crier would ever find her again.before lowering the boat for the chase, the upper end of the line istaken aft from the tub, and passing round the loggerhead there, is againcarried forward the entire length of the boat, resting crosswise uponthe loom or handle of every man's oar, so that it jogs against hiswrist in rowing; and also passing between the men, as they alternatelysit at the opposite gunwales, to the leaded chocks or grooves in theextreme pointed prow of the boat, where a wooden pin or skewer the sizeof a common quill, prevents it from slipping out. from the chocks ithangs in a slight festoon over the bows, and is then passed insidethe boat again; and some ten or twenty fathoms (called box-line) beingcoiled upon the box in the bows, it continues its way to the gunwalestill a little further aft, and is then attached to the short-warp_therope which is immediately connected with the harpoon; but previous tothat connexion, the short-warp goes through sundry mystifications tootedious to detail.thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its complicated coils,twisting and writhing around it in almost every direction. all theoarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions; so that to the timideye of the landsman, they seem as indian jugglers, with the deadliestsnakes sportively festooning their limbs. nor can any son of mortalwoman, for the first time, seat himself amid those hempen intricacies,and while straining his utmost at the oar, bethink him that at anyunknown instant the harpoon may be darted, and all these horriblecontortions be put in play like ringed lightnings; he cannot be thuscircumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in his bonesto quiver in him like a shaken jelly. yet habit_strange thing! whatcannot habit accomplish?_gayer sallies, more merry mirth, betterjokes, and brighter repartees, you never heard over your mahogany, thanyou will hear over the half-inch white cedar of the whale-boat, whenthus hung in hangman's nooses; and, like the six burghers of calaisbefore king edward, the six men composing the crew pull into the jaws ofdeath, with a halter around every neck, as you may say.perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account forthose repeated whaling disasters_some few of which are casuallychronicled_of this man or that man being taken out of the boat by theline, and lost. for, when the line is darting out, to be seated then inthe boat, is like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzingsof a steam-engine in full play, when every flying beam, and shaft, andwheel, is grazing you. it is worse; for you cannot sit motionless in theheart of these perils, because the boat is rocking like a cradle, andyou are pitched one way and the other, without the slightest warning;and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and simultaneousness ofvolition and action, can you escape being made a mazeppa of, and runaway with where the all-seeing sun himself could never pierce you out.again: as the profound calm which only apparently precedes andprophesies of the storm, is perhaps more awful than the storm itself;for, indeed, the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm; andcontains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the fatalpowder, and the ball, and the explosion; so the graceful repose of theline, as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen before being broughtinto actual play_this is a thing which carries more of true terrorthan any other aspect of this dangerous affair. but why say more? allmen live enveloped in whale-lines. all are born with halters round theirnecks; but it is only when caught in the swift, sudden turn of death,that mortals realize the silent, subtle, ever-present perils of life.and if you be a philosopher, though seated in the whale-boat, you wouldnot at heart feel one whit more of terror, than though seated beforeyour evening fire with a poker, and not a harpoon, by your side.chapter 61. stubb kills a whale.if to starbuck the apparition of the squid was a thing of portents, toqueequeg it was quite a different object."when you see him _quid," said the savage, honing his harpoon inthe bow of his hoisted boat, "then you quick see him _parm whale."the next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing specialto engage them, the pequod's crew could hardly resist the spell ofsleep induced by such a vacant sea. for this part of the indian oceanthrough which we then were voyaging is not what whalemen call a livelyground; that is, it affords fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins,flying-fish, and other vivacious denizens of more stirring waters, thanthose off the rio de la plata, or the in-shore ground off peru.it was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shouldersleaning against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro i idly swayed inwhat seemed an enchanted air. no resolution could withstand it; in thatdreamy mood losing all consciousness, at last my soul went out of mybody; though my body still continued to sway as a pendulum will, longafter the power which first moved it is withdrawn.ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, i had noticed that the seamenat the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. so that at lastall three of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every swingthat we made there was a nod from below from the slumbering helmsman.the waves, too, nodded their indolent crests; and across the wide tranceof the sea, east nodded to west, and the sun over all.suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices myhands grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved me;with a shock i came back to life. and lo! close under our lee, not fortyfathoms off, a gigantic sperm whale lay rolling in the water like thecapsized hull of a frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an ethiopian hue,glistening in the sun's rays like a mirror. but lazily undulating inthe trough of the sea, and ever and anon tranquilly spouting his vapouryjet, the whale looked like a portly burgher smoking his pipe of a warmafternoon. but that pipe, poor whale, was thy last. as if struck by someenchanter's wand, the sleepy ship and every sleeper in it all at oncestarted into wakefulness; and more than a score of voices from all partsof the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from aloft, shoutedforth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and regularly spoutedthe sparkling brine into the air."clear away the boats! luff!" cried ahab. and obeying his own order,he dashed the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.the sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and erethe boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the leeward,but with such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples as heswam, that thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed, ahab gaveorders that not an oar should be used, and no man must speak but inwhispers. so seated like ontario indians on the gunwales of the boats,we swiftly but silently paddled along; the calm not admitting of thenoiseless sails being set. presently, as we thus glided in chase, themonster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty feet into the air, andthen sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up."there go flukes!" was the cry, an announcement immediately followedby stubb's producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now arespite was granted. after the full interval of his sounding hadelapsed, the whale rose again, and being now in advance of thesmoker's boat, and much nearer to it than to any of the others, stubbcounted upon the honour of the capture. it was obvious, now, thatthe whale had at length become aware of his pursuers. all silence ofcautiousness was therefore no longer of use. paddles were dropped, andoars came loudly into play. and still puffing at his pipe, stubb cheeredon his crew to the assault.yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. all alive to his jeopardy,he was going "head out"; that part obliquely projecting from the madyeast which he brewed.**it will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance theentire interior of the sperm whale's enormous head consists. thoughapparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part abouthim. so that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably doesso when going at his utmost speed. besides, such is the breadth of theupper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-waterformation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, hethereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggishgalliot into a sharppointed new york pilot-boat."start her, start her, my men! don't hurry yourselves; take plentyof time_but start her; start her like thunder-claps, that's all,"cried stubb, spluttering out the smoke as he spoke. "start her, now;give _em the long and strong stroke, tashtego. start her, tash,my boy_start her, all; but keep cool, keep cool_cucumbers is theword_easy, easy_only start her like grim death and grinningdevils, and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,boys_that's all. start her!""woo-hoo! wa-hee!" screamed the gay-header in reply, raising someold war-whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boatinvoluntarily bounced forward with the one tremendous leading strokewhich the eager indian gave.but his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. "kee-hee!kee-hee!" yelled daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat,like a pacing tiger in his cage."ka-la! koo-loo!" howled queequeg, as if smacking his lips over amouthful of grenadier's steak. and thus with oars and yells the keelscut the sea. meanwhile, stubb retaining his place in the van, stillencouraged his men to the onset, all the while puffing the smoke fromhis mouth. like desperadoes they tugged and they strained, till thewelcome cry was heard_"stand up, tashtego!_give it to him!" theharpoon was hurled. "stern all!" the oarsmen backed water; the samemoment something went hot and hissing along every one of their wrists.it was the magical line. an instant before, stubb had swiftly caught twoadditional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of itsincreased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingledwith the steady fumes from his pipe. as the line passed round andround the loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, itblisteringly passed through and through both of stubb's hands, fromwhich the hand-cloths, or squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn atthese times, had accidentally dropped. it was like holding an enemy'ssharp two-edged sword by the blade, and that enemy all the time strivingto wrest it out of your clutch."wet the line! wet the line!" cried stubb to the tub oarsman (himseated by the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water intoit.* more turns were taken, so that the line began holding its place.the boat now flew through the boiling water like a shark all fins.stubb and tashtego here changed places_stem for stern_a staggeringbusiness truly in that rocking commotion.*partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here bestated, that, in the old dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash therunning line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, orbailer, is set apart for that purpose. your hat, however, is the mostconvenient.from the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part ofthe boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you wouldhave thought the craft had two keels_one cleaving the water, the otherthe air_as the boat churned on through both opposing elements at once.a continual cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy inher wake; and, at the slightest motion from within, even but of a littlefinger, the vibrating, cracking craft canted over her spasmodic gunwaleinto the sea. thus they rushed; each man with might and main clingingto his seat, to prevent being tossed to the foam; and the tall form oftashtego at the steering oar crouching almost double, in order to bringdown his centre of gravity. whole atlantics and pacifics seemed passedas they shot on their way, till at length the whale somewhat slackenedhis flight."haul in_haul in!" cried stubb to the bowsman! and, facing roundtowards the whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while yetthe boat was being towed on. soon ranging up by his flank, stubb, firmlyplanting his knee in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart into theflying fish; at the word of command, the boat alternately sterning outof the way of the whale's horrible wallow, and then ranging up foranother fling.the red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down ahill. his tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which bubbledand seethed for furlongs behind in their wake. the slanting sun playingupon this crimson pond in the sea, sent back its reflection into everyface, so that they all glowed to each other like red men. and allthe while, jet after jet of white smoke was agonizingly shot from thespiracle of the whale, and vehement puff after puff from the mouth ofthe excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling in upon his crookedlance (by the line attached to it), stubb straightened it again andagain, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and againsent it into the whale."pull up_pull up!" he now cried to the bowsman, as the waningwhale relaxed in his wrath. "pull up!_close to!" and the boatranged along the fish's flank. when reaching far over the bow, stubbslowly churned his long sharp lance into the fish, and kept it there,carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously seeking to feel aftersome gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and which he wasfearful of breaking ere he could hook it out. but that gold watch hesought was the innermost life of the fish. and now it is struck;for, starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his"flurry," the monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrappedhimself in impenetrable, mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilledcraft, instantly dropping astern, had much ado blindly to struggle outfrom that phrensied twilight into the clear air of the day.and now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into view;surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting hisspout-hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. at last, gushafter gush of clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees of redwine, shot into the frighted air; and falling back again, ran drippingdown his motionless flanks into the sea. his heart had burst!"he's dead, mr. stubb," said daggoo."yes; both pipes smoked out!" and withdrawing his own from hismouth, stubb scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment,stood thoughtfully eyeing the vast corpse he had made.chapter 62. the dart.a word concerning an incident in the last chapter.according to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushesoff from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporarysteersman, and the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremostoar, the one known as the harpooneer-oar. now it needs a strong, nervousarm to strike the first iron into the fish; for often, in what is calleda long dart, the heavy implement has to be flung to the distance oftwenty or thirty feet. but however prolonged and exhausting the chase,the harpooneer is expected to pull his oar meanwhile to the uttermost;indeed, he is expected to set an example of superhuman activity to therest, not only by incredible rowing, but by repeated loud and intrepidexclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at the top ofone's compass, while all the other muscles are strained and halfstarted_what that is none know but those who have tried it. for one,i cannot bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the sametime. in this straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish,all at once the exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry_"standup, and give it to him!" he now has to drop and secure his oar, turnround on his centre half way, seize his harpoon from the crotch, andwith what little strength may remain, he essays to pitch it somehow intothe whale. no wonder, taking the whole fleet of whalemen in a body, thatout of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are successful; no wonderthat so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and disrated; nowonder that some of them actually burst their blood-vessels in theboat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are absent four years with fourbarrels; no wonder that to many ship owners, whaling is but a losingconcern; for it is the harpooneer that makes the voyage, and if you takethe breath out of his body how can you expect to find it there when mostwanted!again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant,that is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneerlikewise start to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy ofthemselves and every one else. it is then they change places; andthe headsman, the chief officer of the little craft, takes his properstation in the bows of the boat.now, i care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both foolishand unnecessary. the headsman should stay in the bows from first tolast; he should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no rowingwhatever should be expected of him, except under circumstances obviousto any fisherman. i know that this would sometimes involve a slight lossof speed in the chase; but long experience in various whalemen of morethan one nation has convinced me that in the vast majority of failuresin the fishery, it has not by any means been so much the speed of thewhale as the before described exhaustion of the harpooneer that hascaused them.to insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of thisworld must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out oftoil.chapter 63. the crotch.out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. so, inproductive subjects, grow the chapters.the crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention.it is a notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length, whichis perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the bow,for the purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of theharpoon, whose other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the prow.thereby the weapon is instantly at hand to its hurler, who snatches itup as readily from its rest as a backwoodsman swings his rifle fromthe wall. it is customary to have two harpoons reposing in the crotch,respectively called the first and second irons.but these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected withthe line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, oneinstantly after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the comingdrag, one should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. it is adoubling of the chances. but it very often happens that owing to theinstantaneous, violent, convulsive running of the whale upon receivingthe first iron, it becomes impossible for the harpooneer, howeverlightning-like in his movements, to pitch the second iron into him.nevertheless, as the second iron is already connected with the line,and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at all events, beanticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere; else themost terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. tumbled into the water,it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line (mentionedin a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances, prudentlypracticable. but this critical act is not always unattended with thesaddest and most fatal casualties.furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrownoverboard, it thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror,skittishly curvetting about both boat and whale, entangling the lines,or cutting them, and making a prodigious sensation in all directions.nor, in general, is it possible to secure it again until the whale isfairly captured and a corpse.consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engagingone unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to thesequalities in him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents ofsuch an audacious enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may besimultaneously dangling about him. for, of course, each boat is suppliedwith several harpoons to bend on to the line should the first onebe ineffectually darted without recovery. all these particulars arefaithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to elucidate severalmost important, however intricate passages, in scenes hereafter to bepainted.chapter 64. stubb's supper.stubb's whale had been killed some distance from the ship. it wasa calm; so, forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slowbusiness of towing the trophy to the pequod. and now, as we eighteen menwith our thirty-six arms, and one hundred and eighty thumbs and fingers,slowly toiled hour after hour upon that inert, sluggish corpse in thesea; and it seemed hardly to budge at all, except at long intervals;good evidence was hereby furnished of the enormousness of the mass wemoved. for, upon the great canal of hang-ho, or whatever they callit, in china, four or five laborers on the foot-path will draw a bulkyfreighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this grand argosy wetowed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead in bulk.darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the pequod'smain-rigging dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw ahabdropping one of several more lanterns over the bulwarks. vacantly eyeingthe heaving whale for a moment, he issued the usual orders for securingit for the night, and then handing his lantern to a seaman, went his wayinto the cabin, and did not come forward again until morning.though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, captain ahab hadevinced his customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the creaturewas dead, some vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or despair, seemedworking in him; as if the sight of that dead body reminded him thatmoby dick was yet to be slain; and though a thousand other whales werebrought to his ship, all that would not one jot advance his grand,monomaniac object. very soon you would have thought from the sound onthe pequod's decks, that all hands were preparing to cast anchor inthe deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the deck, and thrustrattling out of the port-holes. but by those clanking links, the vastcorpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. tied by the head to thestern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies with its blackhull close to the vessel's and seen through the darkness of the night,which obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two_ship and whale,seemed yoked together like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines whilethe other remains standing.**a little item may as well be related here. the strongest and mostreliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside,is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that partis relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), itsflexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface; sothat with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order toput the chain round it. but this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: asmall, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end, anda weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship. byadroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other sideof the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readilymade to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last lockedfast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction withits broad flukes or lobes.if moody ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be knownon deck, stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed anunusual but still good-natured excitement. such an unwonted bustle washe in that the staid starbuck, his official superior, quietly resignedto him for the time the sole management of affairs. one small, helpingcause of all this liveliness in stubb, was soon made strangely manifest.stubb was a high liver; he was somewhat intemperately fond of the whaleas a flavorish thing to his palate."a steak, a steak, ere i sleep! you, daggoo! overboard you go, and cutme one from his small!"here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a generalthing, and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defraythe current expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceedsof the voyage), yet now and then you find some of these nantucketerswho have a genuine relish for that particular part of the sperm whaledesignated by stubb; comprising the tapering extremity of the body.about midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by twolanterns of sperm oil, stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supperat the capstan-head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. nor wasstubb the only banqueter on whale's flesh that night. mingling theirmumblings with his own mastications, thousands on thousands of sharks,swarming round the dead leviathan, smackingly feasted on its fatness.the few sleepers below in their bunks were often startled by the sharpslapping of their tails against the hull, within a few inches of thesleepers' hearts. peering over the side you could just see them(as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, andturning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces ofthe whale of the bigness of a human head. this particular feat of theshark seems all but miraculous. how at such an apparently unassailablesurface, they contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remainsa part of the universal problem of all things. the mark they thus leaveon the whale, may best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter incountersinking for a screw.though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharkswill be seen longingly gazing up to the ship's decks, like hungry dogsround a table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt downevery killed man that is tossed to them; and though, while the valiantbutchers over the deck-table are thus cannibally carving each other'slive meat with carving-knives all gilded and tasselled, the sharks,also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are quarrelsomely carving awayunder the table at the dead meat; and though, were you to turn the wholeaffair upside down, it would still be pretty much the same thing, thatis to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all parties; andthough sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave shipscrossing the atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy incase a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be decentlyburied; and though one or two other like instances might be set down,touching the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do mostsocially congregate, and most hilariously feast; yet is there noconceivable time or occasion when you will find them in such countlessnumbers, and in gayer or more jovial spirits, than around a dead spermwhale, moored by night to a whaleship at sea. if you have neverseen that sight, then suspend your decision about the propriety ofdevil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.but, as yet, stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that wasgoing on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of hisown epicurean lips."cook, cook!_where's that old fleece?" he cried at length,widening his legs still further, as if to form a more secure base forhis supper; and, at the same time darting his fork into the dish, as ifstabbing with his lance; "cook, you cook!_sail this way, cook!"the old black, not in any very high glee at having been previouslyroused from his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came shamblingalong from his galley, for, like many old blacks, there was somethingthe matter with his knee-pans, which he did not keep well scoured likehis other pans; this old fleece, as they called him, came shuffling andlimping along, assisting his step with his tongs, which, after a clumsyfashion, were made of straightened iron hoops; this old ebony flounderedalong, and in obedience to the word of command, came to a dead stop onthe opposite side of stubb's sideboard; when, with both hands foldedbefore him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he bowed his arched backstill further over, at the same time sideways inclining his head, so asto bring his best ear into play."cook," said stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to hismouth, "don't you think this steak is rather overdone? you've beenbeating this steak too much, cook; it's too tender. don't i alwayssay that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough? there are those sharksnow over the side, don't you see they prefer it tough and rare? what ashindy they are kicking up! cook, go and talk to _em; tell _em theyare welcome to help themselves civilly, and in moderation, but theymust keep quiet. blast me, if i can hear my own voice. away, cook, anddeliver my message. here, take this lantern," snatching one from hissideboard; "now then, go and preach to _em!"sullenly taking the offered lantern, old fleece limped across the deckto the bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over thesea, so as to get a good view of his congregation, with the other handhe solemnly flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in amumbling voice began addressing the sharks, while stubb, softly crawlingbehind, overheard all that was said."fellow-critters: i'se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat damnoise dare. you hear? stop dat dam smackin' ob de lips! massa stubbsay dat you can fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by gor!you must stop dat dam racket!""cook," here interposed stubb, accompanying the word with a suddenslap on the shoulder,_"cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn'tswear that way when you're preaching. that's no way to convertsinners, cook!""who dat? den preach to him yourself," sullenly turning to go."no, cook; go on, go on.""well, den, belubed fellow-critters:"_"right!" exclaimed stubb, approvingly, "coax _em to it; trythat," and fleece continued."do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet i zay to you,fellow-critters, dat dat woraciousness__top dat dam slappin' ob detail! how you tink to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin' andbitin' dare?""cook," cried stubb, collaring him, "i won't have that swearing.talk to _em gentlemanly."once more the sermon proceeded."your woraciousness, fellow-critters, i don't blame ye so much for;dat is natur, and can't be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, datis de pint. you is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you,why den you be angel; for all angel is not'ing more dan de shark wellgoberned. now, look here, bred'ren, just try wonst to be cibil, ahelping yourselbs from dat whale. don't be tearin' de blubber outyour neighbour's mout, i say. is not one shark dood right as toder todat whale? and, by gor, none on you has de right to dat whale; datwhale belong to some one else. i know some o' you has berry brig mout,brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de small bellies;so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to bit off deblubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can't get into de scrouge tohelp demselves.""well done, old fleece!" cried stubb, "that's christianity; goon.""no use goin' on; de dam willains will keep a scougin' andslappin' each oder, massa stubb; dey don't hear one word; no usea-preaching to such dam g'uttons as you call _em, till dare belliesis full, and dare bellies is bottomless; and when dey do get _em full,dey wont hear you den; for den dey sink in the sea, go fast to sleep onde coral, and can't hear noting at all, no more, for eber and eber.""upon my soul, i am about of the same opinion; so give thebenediction, fleece, and i'll away to my supper."upon this, fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised hisshrill voice, and cried_"cussed fellow-critters! kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fillyour dam bellies _till dey bust_and den die.""now, cook," said stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan;"stand just where you stood before, there, over against me, and payparticular attention.""all _dention," said fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs inthe desired position."well," said stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; "i shall nowgo back to the subject of this steak. in the first place, how old areyou, cook?""what dat do wid de _teak," said the old black, testily."silence! how old are you, cook?""_bout ninety, dey say," he gloomily muttered."and you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook,and don't know yet how to cook a whale-steak?" rapidly boltinganother mouthful at the last word, so that morsel seemed a continuationof the question. "where were you born, cook?""_hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin' ober de roanoke.""born in a ferry-boat! that's queer, too. but i want to know whatcountry you were born in, cook!""didn't i say de roanoke country?" he cried sharply."no, you didn't, cook; but i'll tell you what i'm coming to,cook. you must go home and be born over again; you don't know how tocook a whale-steak yet.""bress my soul, if i cook noder one," he growled, angrily, turninground to depart."come back here, cook;_here, hand me those tongs;_now take thatbit of steak there, and tell me if you think that steak cooked as itshould be? take it, i say"_holding the tongs towards him_"takeit, and taste it."faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negromuttered, "best cooked _teak i eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.""cook," said stubb, squaring himself once more; "do you belong tothe church?""passed one once in cape-down," said the old man sullenly."and you have once in your life passed a holy church in cape-town,where you doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers ashis beloved fellow-creatures, have you, cook! and yet you come here,and tell me such a dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?" said stubb."where do you expect to go to, cook?""go to bed berry soon," he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke."avast! heave to! i mean when you die, cook. it's an awful question.now what's your answer?""when dis old brack man dies," said the negro slowly, changinghis whole air and demeanor, "he hisself won't go nowhere; but somebressed angel will come and fetch him.""fetch him? how? in a coach and four, as they fetched elijah? andfetch him where?""up dere," said fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head,and keeping it there very solemnly."so, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, whenyou are dead? but don't you know the higher you climb, the colder itgets? main-top, eh?""didn't say dat t'all," said fleece, again in the sulks."you said up there, didn't you? and now look yourself, and see whereyour tongs are pointing. but, perhaps you expect to get into heavenby crawling through the lubber's hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, youdon't get there, except you go the regular way, round by the rigging.it's a ticklish business, but must be done, or else it's no go. butnone of us are in heaven yet. drop your tongs, cook, and hear my orders.do ye hear? hold your hat in one hand, and clap t'other a'top ofyour heart, when i'm giving my orders, cook. what! that your heart,there?_that's your gizzard! aloft! aloft!_that's it_now youhave it. hold it there now, and pay attention.""all _dention," said the old black, with both hands placed asdesired, vainly wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears infront at one and the same time."well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad,that i have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that,don't you? well, for the future, when you cook another whale-steak formy private table here, the capstan, i'll tell you what to do so as notto spoil it by overdoing. hold the steak in one hand, and show a livecoal to it with the other; that done, dish it; d'ye hear? and nowto-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish, be sure you stand byto get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. as for the ends ofthe flukes, have them soused, cook. there, now ye may go."but fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled."cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch.d'ye hear? away you sail, then._halloa! stop! make a bow beforeyou go._avast heaving again! whale-balls for breakfast_don'tforget.""wish, by gor! whale eat him, _stead of him eat whale. i'm bressedif he ain't more of shark dan massa shark hisself," muttered the oldman, limping away; with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.chapter 65. the whale as a dish.that mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and,like stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems sooutlandish a thing that one must needs go a little into the history andphilosophy of it.it is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the rightwhale was esteemed a great delicacy in france, and commanded largeprices there. also, that in henry viiith's time, a certain cook of thecourt obtained a handsome reward for inventing an admirable sauce to beeaten with barbacued porpoises, which, you remember, are a species ofwhale. porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fine eating. themeat is made into balls about the size of billiard balls, and being wellseasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-balls or veal balls.the old monks of dunfermline were very fond of them. they had a greatporpoise grant from the crown.the fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by allhands be considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; butwhen you come to sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feetlong, it takes away your appetite. only the most unprejudiced of menlike stubb, nowadays partake of cooked whales; but the esquimaux are notso fastidious. we all know how they live upon whales, and have rareold vintages of prime old train oil. zogranda, one of their most famousdoctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as being exceedinglyjuicy and nourishing. and this reminds me that certain englishmen, wholong ago were accidentally left in greenland by a whaling vessel_thatthese men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps ofwhales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. amongthe dutch whalemen these scraps are called "fritters"; which,indeed, they greatly resemble, being brown and crisp, and smellingsomething like old amsterdam housewives' dough-nuts or oly-cooks,when fresh. they have such an eatable look that the most self-denyingstranger can hardly keep his hands off.but what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is hisexceeding richness. he is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to bedelicately good. look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as thebuffalo's (which is esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solidpyramid of fat. but the spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy thatis; like the transparent, half-jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in thethird month of its growth, yet far too rich to supply a substitute forbutter. nevertheless, many whalemen have a method of absorbing it intosome other substance, and then partaking of it. in the long trywatches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip theirship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. manya good supper have i thus made.in the case of a small sperm whale the brains are accounted a fine dish.the casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two plump,whitish lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large puddings),they are then mixed with flour, and cooked into a most delectable mess,in flavor somewhat resembling calves' head, which is quite a dishamong some epicures; and every one knows that some young bucks among theepicures, by continually dining upon calves' brains, by and by get tohave a little brains of their own, so as to be able to tell acalf's head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires uncommondiscrimination. and that is the reason why a young buck with anintelligent looking calf's head before him, is somehow one of thesaddest sights you can see. the head looks a sort of reproachfully athim, with an "et tu brute!" expression.it is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessivelyunctuous that landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with abhorrence;that appears to result, in some way, from the consideration beforementioned: i.e. that a man should eat a newly murdered thing of the sea,and eat it too by its own light. but no doubt the first man that evermurdered an ox was regarded as a murderer; perhaps he was hung; and ifhe had been put on his trial by oxen, he certainly would have been; andhe certainly deserved it if any murderer does. go to the meat-marketof a saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds staring up at thelong rows of dead quadrupeds. does not that sight take a tooth out ofthe cannibal's jaw? cannibals? who is not a cannibal? i tell you itwill be more tolerable for the fejee that salted down a lean missionaryin his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable forthat provident fejee, i say, in the day of judgment, than for thee,civilized and enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground andfeastest on their bloated livers in thy pate-de-foie-gras.but stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that isadding insult to injury, is it? look at your knife-handle, there, mycivilized and enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what isthat handle made of?_what but the bones of the brother of the very oxyou are eating? and what do you pick your teeth with, after devouringthat fat goose? with a feather of the same fowl. and with what quill didthe secretary of the society for the suppression of cruelty to gandersformally indite his circulars? it is only within the last month or twothat that society passed a resolution to patronise nothing but steelpens.chapter 66. the shark massacre.when in the southern fishery, a captured sperm whale, after long andweary toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a generalthing at least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cuttinghim in. for that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not verysoon completed; and requires all hands to set about it. therefore, thecommon usage is to take in all sail; lash the helm a'lee; and thensend every one below to his hammock till daylight, with the reservationthat, until that time, anchor-watches shall be kept; that is, two andtwo for an hour, each couple, the crew in rotation shall mount the deckto see that all goes well.but sometimes, especially upon the line in the pacific, this plan willnot answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gatherround the moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on astretch, little more than the skeleton would be visible by morning.in most other parts of the ocean, however, where these fish do not solargely abound, their wondrous voracity can be at times considerablydiminished, by vigorously stirring them up with sharp whaling-spades,a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some instances, only seems totickle them into still greater activity. but it was not thus in thepresent case with the pequod's sharks; though, to be sure, any manunaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, andthose sharks the maggots in it.nevertheless, upon stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper wasconcluded; and when, accordingly, queequeg and a forecastle seamancame on deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; forimmediately suspending the cutting stages over the side, and loweringthree lanterns, so that they cast long gleams of light over the turbidsea, these two mariners, darting their long whaling-spades, kept up anincessant murdering of the sharks,* by striking the keen steel deepinto their skulls, seemingly their only vital part. but in the foamyconfusion of their mixed and struggling hosts, the marksmen could notalways hit their mark; and this brought about new revelations of theincredible ferocity of the foe. they viciously snapped, not only at eachother's disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round, and bittheir own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again bythe same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. nor wasthis all. it was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of thesecreatures. a sort of generic or pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk intheir very joints and bones, after what might be called the individuallife had departed. killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin,one of these sharks almost took poor queequeg's hand off, when hetried to shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw.*the whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel;is about the bigness of a man's spread hand; and in general shape,corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only itssides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower thanthe lower. this weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and whenbeing used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. in its socket, astiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle."queequeg no care what god made him shark," said the savage,agonizingly lifting his hand up and down; "wedder fejee god ornantucket god; but de god wat made shark must be one dam ingin."chapter 67. cutting in.it was a saturday night, and such a sabbath as followed! ex officioprofessors of sabbath breaking are all whalemen. the ivory pequod wasturned into what seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. you wouldhave thought we were offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.in the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderousthings comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and whichno single man can possibly lift_this vast bunch of grapes was swayedup to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, thestrongest point anywhere above a ship's deck. the end of thehawser-like rope winding through these intricacies, was then conductedto the windlass, and the huge lower block of the tackles was swungover the whale; to this block the great blubber hook, weighing some onehundred pounds, was attached. and now suspended in stages over theside, starbuck and stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades, begancutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just above thenearest of the two side-fins. this done, a broad, semicircular line iscut round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the main body of the crewstriking up a wild chorus, now commence heaving in one dense crowd atthe windlass. when instantly, the entire ship careens over on her side;every bolt in her starts like the nail-heads of an old house in frostyweather; she trembles, quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads tothe sky. more and more she leans over to the whale, while every gaspingheave of the windlass is answered by a helping heave from the billows;till at last, a swift, startling snap is heard; with a great swash theship rolls upwards and backwards from the whale, and the triumphanttackle rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged semicircularend of the first strip of blubber. now as the blubber envelopes thewhale precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off fromthe body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it.for the strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keepsthe whale rolling over and over in the water, and as the blubber inone strip uniformly peels off along the line called the "scarf,"simultaneously cut by the spades of starbuck and stubb, the mates;and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and indeed by that very actitself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and higher aloft tillits upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass then ceaseheaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping masssways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one present musttake good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may box his ears andpitch him headlong overboard.one of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weaponcalled a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slicesout a considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. into thishole, the end of the second alternating great tackle is then hookedso as to retain a hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for whatfollows. whereupon, this accomplished swordsman, warning all hands tostand off, once more makes a scientific dash at the mass, and with a fewsidelong, desperate, lunging slicings, severs it completely in twain;so that while the short lower part is still fast, the long upper strip,called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is all ready for lowering.the heavers forward now resume their song, and while the one tackle ispeeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the other is slowlyslackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main hatchwayright beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the blubber-room. intothis twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep coiling away the longblanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of plaited serpents.and thus the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting and loweringsimultaneously; both whale and windlass heaving, the heavers singing,the blubber-room gentlemen coiling, the mates scarfing, the shipstraining, and all hands swearing occasionally, by way of assuaging thegeneral friction.chapter 68. the blanket.i have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin ofthe whale. i have had controversies about it with experienced whalemenafloat, and learned naturalists ashore. my original opinion remainsunchanged; but it is only an opinion.the question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? already youknow what his blubber is. that blubber is something of the consistenceof firm, close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, andranges from eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of anycreature's skin as being of that sort of consistence and thickness,yet in point of fact these are no arguments against such a presumption;because you cannot raise any other dense enveloping layer from thewhale's body but that same blubber; and the outermost enveloping layerof any animal, if reasonably dense, what can that be but the skin? true,from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may scrape off with yourhand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat resembling thethinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as flexible and soft assatin; that is, previous to being dried, when it not only contracts andthickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. i have several such driedbits, which i use for marks in my whale-books. it is transparent, asi said before; and being laid upon the printed page, i have sometimespleased myself with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence. at anyrate, it is pleasant to read about whales through their own spectacles,as you may say. but what i am driving at here is this. that sameinfinitely thin, isinglass substance, which, i admit, invests the entirebody of the whale, is not so much to be regarded as the skin of thecreature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak; for it were simplyridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous whale isthinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child. but no moreof this.assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin,as in the case of a very large sperm whale, will yield the bulk of onehundred barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity, orrather weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three fourths,and not the entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence be hadof the enormousness of that animated mass, a mere part of whose mereintegument yields such a lake of liquid as that. reckoning ten barrelsto the ton, you have ten tons for the net weight of only three quartersof the stuff of the whale's skin.in life, the visible surface of the sperm whale is not the least amongthe many marvels he presents. almost invariably it is all over obliquelycrossed and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in thick array,something like those in the finest italian line engravings. but thesemarks do not seem to be impressed upon the isinglass substance abovementioned, but seem to be seen through it, as if they were engravedupon the body itself. nor is this all. in some instances, to the quick,observant eye, those linear marks, as in a veritable engraving, butafford the ground for far other delineations. these are hieroglyphical;that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers on the walls of pyramidshieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to use in the presentconnexion. by my retentive memory of the hieroglyphics upon one spermwhale in particular, i was much struck with a plate representing the oldindian characters chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades onthe banks of the upper mississippi. like those mystic rocks, too, themystic-marked whale remains undecipherable. this allusion to the indianrocks reminds me of another thing. besides all the other phenomena whichthe exterior of the sperm whale presents, he not seldom displays theback, and more especially his flanks, effaced in great part of theregular linear appearance, by reason of numerous rude scratches,altogether of an irregular, random aspect. i should say that those newengland rocks on the sea-coast, which agassiz imagines to bear the marksof violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs_i should say,that those rocks must not a little resemble the sperm whale in thisparticular. it also seems to me that such scratches in the whale areprobably made by hostile contact with other whales; for i have mostremarked them in the large, full-grown bulls of the species.a word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber ofthe whale. it has already been said, that it is stript from him in longpieces, called blanket-pieces. like most sea-terms, this one is veryhappy and significant. for the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubberas in a real blanket or counterpane; or, still better, an indian ponchoslipt over his head, and skirting his extremity. it is by reason of thiscosy blanketing of his body, that the whale is enabled to keep himselfcomfortable in all weathers, in all seas, times, and tides. what wouldbecome of a greenland whale, say, in those shuddering, icy seas of thenorth, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? true, other fish arefound exceedingly brisk in those hyperborean waters; but these, be itobserved, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very belliesare refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the lee ofan iceberg, as a traveller in winter would bask before an inn fire;whereas, like man, the whale has lungs and warm blood. freeze his blood,and he dies. how wonderful is it then_except after explanation_thatthis great monster, to whom corporeal warmth is as indispensable as itis to man; how wonderful that he should be found at home, immersedto his lips for life in those arctic waters! where, when seamen falloverboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards, perpendicularlyfrozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found gluedin amber. but more surprising is it to know, as has been proved byexperiment, that the blood of a polar whale is warmer than that of aborneo negro in summer.it does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strongindividual vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rarevirtue of interior spaciousness. oh, man! admire and model thyself afterthe whale! do thou, too, remain warm among ice. do thou, too, live inthis world without being of it. be cool at the equator; keep thy bloodfluid at the pole. like the great dome of st. peter's, and like thegreat whale, retain, o man! in all seasons a temperature of thine own.but how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! of erections,how few are domed like st. peter's! of creatures, how few vast as thewhale!chapter 69. the funeral.haul in the chains! let the carcase go astern!the vast tackles have now done their duty. the peeled white body of thebeheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue,it has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. it is still colossal.slowly it floats more and more away, the water round it torn andsplashed by the insatiate sharks, and the air above vexed with rapaciousflights of screaming fowls, whose beaks are like so many insultingponiards in the whale. the vast white headless phantom floats furtherand further from the ship, and every rod that it so floats, what seemsquare roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls, augment the murderousdin. for hours and hours from the almost stationary ship that hideoussight is seen. beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the fairface of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that great massof death floats on and on, till lost in infinite perspectives.there's a most doleful and most mocking funeral! the sea-vulturesall in pious mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black orspeckled. in life but few of them would have helped the whale, i ween,if peradventure he had needed it; but upon the banquet of his funeralthey most piously do pounce. oh, horrible vultureism of earth! fromwhich not the mightiest whale is free.nor is this the end. desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghostsurvives and hovers over it to scare. espied by some timid man-of-war orblundering discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring theswarming fowls, nevertheless still shows the white mass floating inthe sun, and the white spray heaving high against it; straightway thewhale's unharming corpse, with trembling fingers is set down in thelog_shoals, rocks, and breakers hereabouts: beware! and for yearsafterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place; leaping over it as sillysheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader originally leaped therewhen a stick was held. there's your law of precedents; there's yourutility of traditions; there's the story of your obstinate survivalof old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering inthe air! there's orthodoxy!thus, while in life the great whale's body may have been a real terrorto his foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to aworld.are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? there are other ghosts thanthe cock-lane one, and far deeper men than doctor johnson who believe inthem.chapter 70. the sphynx.it should not have been omitted that previous to completely strippingthe body of the leviathan, he was beheaded. now, the beheading of thesperm whale is a scientific anatomical feat, upon which experiencedwhale surgeons very much pride themselves: and not without reason.consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck;on the contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in thatvery place, is the thickest part of him. remember, also, that thesurgeon must operate from above, some eight or ten feet interveningbetween him and his subject, and that subject almost hidden in adiscoloured, rolling, and oftentimes tumultuous and bursting sea. bearin mind, too, that under these untoward circumstances he has to cut manyfeet deep in the flesh; and in that subterraneous manner, without somuch as getting one single peep into the ever-contracting gash thusmade, he must skilfully steer clear of all adjacent, interdicted parts,and exactly divide the spine at a critical point hard by its insertioninto the skull. do you not marvel, then, at stubb's boast, that hedemanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?when first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a cabletill the body is stripped. that done, if it belong to a small whaleit is hoisted on deck to be deliberately disposed of. but, with afull grown leviathan this is impossible; for the sperm whale's headembraces nearly one third of his entire bulk, and completely to suspendsuch a burden as that, even by the immense tackles of a whaler, thiswere as vain a thing as to attempt weighing a dutch barn in jewellers'scales.the pequod's whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the headwas hoisted against the ship's side_about half way out of the sea,so that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element.and there with the strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reasonof the enormous downward drag from the lower mast-head, and everyyard-arm on that side projecting like a crane over the waves; there,that blood-dripping head hung to the pequod's waist like the giantholofernes's from the girdle of judith.when this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen wentbelow to their dinner. silence reigned over the before tumultuous butnow deserted deck. an intense copper calm, like a universal yellowlotus, was more and more unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves uponthe sea.a short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came ahab alonefrom his cabin. taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused togaze over the side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he tookstubb's long spade_still remaining there after the whale'sdecapitation_and striking it into the lower part of the half-suspendedmass, placed its other end crutch-wise under one arm, and so stoodleaning over with eyes attentively fixed on this head.it was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of sointense a calm, it seemed the sphynx's in the desert. "speak, thouvast and venerable head," muttered ahab, "which, though ungarnishedwith a beard, yet here and there lookest hoary with mosses; speak,mighty head, and tell us the secret thing that is in thee. of alldivers, thou hast dived the deepest. that head upon which the upper sunnow gleams, has moved amid this world's foundations. where unrecordednames and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot; where in hermurderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of millionsof the drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy mostfamiliar home. thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast sleptby many a sailor's side, where sleepless mothers would give theirlives to lay them down. thou saw'st the locked lovers when leapingfrom their flaming ship; heart to heart they sank beneath the exultingwave; true to each other, when heaven seemed false to them. thousaw'st the murdered mate when tossed by pirates from the midnightdeck; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of the insatiate maw;and his murderers still sailed on unharmed_while swift lightningsshivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous husbandto outstretched, longing arms. o head! thou hast seen enough to splitthe planets and make an infidel of abraham, and not one syllable isthine!""sail ho!" cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head."aye? well, now, that's cheering," cried ahab, suddenly erectinghimself, while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow."that lively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert a betterman._where away?""three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breezeto us!"better and better, man. would now st. paul would come along that way,and to my breezelessness bring his breeze! o nature, and o soul of man!how far beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the smallestatom stirs or lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate in mind."chapter 71. the jeroboam's story.hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster thanthe ship, and soon the pequod began to rock.by and by, through the glass the stranger's boats and mannedmast-heads proved her a whale-ship. but as she was so far to windward,and shooting by, apparently making a passage to some other ground, thepequod could not hope to reach her. so the signal was set to see whatresponse would be made.here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships ofthe american whale fleet have each a private signal; all which signalsbeing collected in a book with the names of the respective vesselsattached, every captain is provided with it. thereby, the whalecommanders are enabled to recognise each other upon the ocean, even atconsiderable distances and with no small facility.the pequod's signal was at last responded to by the stranger'ssetting her own; which proved the ship to be the jeroboam of nantucket.squaring her yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the pequod'slee, and lowered a boat; it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder wasbeing rigged by starbuck's order to accommodate the visiting captain,the stranger in question waved his hand from his boat's stern in tokenof that proceeding being entirely unnecessary. it turned out thatthe jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on board, and that mayhew, hercaptain, was fearful of infecting the pequod's company. for, thoughhimself and boat's crew remained untainted, and though his ship washalf a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling andflowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine ofthe land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with thepequod.but this did by no means prevent all communications. preserving aninterval of some few yards between itself and the ship, the jeroboam'sboat by the occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to thepequod, as she heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it blewvery fresh), with her main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times bythe sudden onset of a large rolling wave, the boat would be pushed someway ahead; but would be soon skilfully brought to her proper bearingsagain. subject to this, and other the like interruptions now and then, aconversation was sustained between the two parties; but at intervals notwithout still another interruption of a very different sort.pulling an oar in the jeroboam's boat, was a man of a singularappearance, even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilitiesmake up all totalities. he was a small, short, youngish man, sprinkledall over his face with freckles, and wearing redundant yellow hair. along-skirted, cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge envelopedhim; the overlapping sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists. adeep, settled, fanatic delirium was in his eyes.so soon as this figure had been first descried, stubb hadexclaimed_"that's he! that's he!_the long-togged scaramouchthe town-ho's company told us of!" stubb here alluded to a strangestory told of the jeroboam, and a certain man among her crew, some timeprevious when the pequod spoke the town-ho. according to this accountand what was subsequently learned, it seemed that the scaramouch inquestion had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost everybody in thejeroboam. his story was this:he had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of neskyeunashakers, where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secretmeetings having several times descended from heaven by the way of atrap-door, announcing the speedy opening of the seventh vial, which hecarried in his vest-pocket; but, which, instead of containing gunpowder,was supposed to be charged with laudanum. a strange, apostolic whimhaving seized him, he had left neskyeuna for nantucket, where, withthat cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a steady, common-senseexterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate for thejeroboam's whaling voyage. they engaged him; but straightway uponthe ship's getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in afreshet. he announced himself as the archangel gabriel, and commandedthe captain to jump overboard. he published his manifesto, wherebyhe set himself forth as the deliverer of the isles of the sea andvicar-general of all oceanica. the unflinching earnestness with which hedeclared these things;_the dark, daring play of his sleepless, excitedimagination, and all the preternatural terrors of real delirium, unitedto invest this gabriel in the minds of the majority of the ignorantcrew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. moreover, they were afraid ofhim. as such a man, however, was not of much practical use in the ship,especially as he refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulouscaptain would fain have been rid of him; but apprised that thatindividual's intention was to land him in the first convenient port,the archangel forthwith opened all his seals and vials_devoting theship and all hands to unconditional perdition, in case this intentionwas carried out. so strongly did he work upon his disciples among thecrew, that at last in a body they went to the captain and told him ifgabriel was sent from the ship, not a man of them would remain. he wastherefore forced to relinquish his plan. nor would they permit gabrielto be any way maltreated, say or do what he would; so that it came topass that gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship. the consequenceof all this was, that the archangel cared little or nothing for thecaptain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken out, he carried ahigher hand than ever; declaring that the plague, as he called it, wasat his sole command; nor should it be stayed but according to his goodpleasure. the sailors, mostly poor devils, cringed, and some of themfawned before him; in obedience to his instructions, sometimes renderinghim personal homage, as to a god. such things may seem incredible; but,however wondrous, they are true. nor is the history of fanatics halfso striking in respect to the measureless self-deception of the fanatichimself, as his measureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so manyothers. but it is time to return to the pequod."i fear not thy epidemic, man," said ahab from the bulwarks, tocaptain mayhew, who stood in the boat's stern; "come on board."but now gabriel started to his feet."think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! beware of thehorrible plague!""gabriel! gabriel!" cried captain mayhew; "thou must either_"but that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and itsseethings drowned all speech."hast thou seen the white whale?" demanded ahab, when the boatdrifted back."think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! beware of thehorrible tail!""i tell thee again, gabriel, that_" but again the boat tore aheadas if dragged by fiends. nothing was said for some moments, while asuccession of riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasionalcaprices of the seas were tumbling, not heaving it. meantime, thehoisted sperm whale's head jogged about very violently, and gabrielwas seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than his archangelnature seemed to warrant.when this interlude was over, captain mayhew began a dark storyconcerning moby dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions fromgabriel, whenever his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemedleagued with him.it seemed that the jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speakinga whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of mobydick, and the havoc he had made. greedily sucking in this intelligence,gabriel solemnly warned the captain against attacking the whitewhale, in case the monster should be seen; in his gibbering insanity,pronouncing the white whale to be no less a being than the shaker godincarnated; the shakers receiving the bible. but when, some year or twoafterwards, moby dick was fairly sighted from the mast-heads, macey, thechief mate, burned with ardour to encounter him; and the captain himselfbeing not unwilling to let him have the opportunity, despite allthe archangel's denunciations and forewarnings, macey succeeded inpersuading five men to man his boat. with them he pushed off; and, aftermuch weary pulling, and many perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at lastsucceeded in getting one iron fast. meantime, gabriel, ascending tothe main-royal mast-head, was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, andhurling forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailantsof his divinity. now, while macey, the mate, was standing up in hisboat's bow, and with all the reckless energy of his tribe was ventinghis wild exclamations upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chancefor his poised lance, lo! a broad white shadow rose from the sea; by itsquick, fanning motion, temporarily taking the breath out of the bodiesof the oarsmen. next instant, the luckless mate, so full of furiouslife, was smitten bodily into the air, and making a long arc in hisdescent, fell into the sea at the distance of about fifty yards. not achip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any oarsman's head; but themate for ever sank.it is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in thesperm-whale fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any.sometimes, nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated;oftener the boat's bow is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in whichthe headsman stands, is torn from its place and accompanies the body.but strangest of all is the circumstance, that in more instances thanone, when the body has been recovered, not a single mark of violence isdiscernible; the man being stark dead.the whole calamity, with the falling form of macey, was plainly descriedfrom the ship. raising a piercing shriek_"the vial! the vial!"gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further huntingof the whale. this terrible event clothed the archangel with addedinfluence; because his credulous disciples believed that he hadspecifically fore-announced it, instead of only making a generalprophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced to hit oneof many marks in the wide margin allowed. he became a nameless terror tothe ship.mayhew having concluded his narration, ahab put such questions tohim, that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether heintended to hunt the white whale, if opportunity should offer. to whichahab answered_"aye." straightway, then, gabriel once more startedto his feet, glaring upon the old man, and vehemently exclaimed, withdownward pointed finger_"think, think of the blasphemer_dead, anddown there!_beware of the blasphemer's end!"ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to mayhew, "captain, i havejust bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thyofficers, if i mistake not. starbuck, look over the bag."every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships,whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed, dependsupon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans. thus,most letters never reach their mark; and many are only received afterattaining an age of two or three years or more.soon starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. it was sorely tumbled,damp, and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in consequenceof being kept in a dark locker of the cabin. of such a letter, deathhimself might well have been the post-boy."can'st not read it?" cried ahab. "give it me, man. aye, aye,it's but a dim scrawl;_what's this?" as he was studying it out,starbuck took a long cutting-spade pole, and with his knife slightlysplit the end, to insert the letter there, and in that way, hand it tothe boat, without its coming any closer to the ship.meantime, ahab holding the letter, muttered, "mr. har_yes,mr. harry_(a woman's pinny hand,_the man's wife, i'llwager)_aye_mr. harry macey, ship jeroboam;_why it's macey, andhe's dead!""poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife," sighed mayhew; "butlet me have it.""nay, keep it thyself," cried gabriel to ahab; "thou art soongoing that way.""curses throttle thee!" yelled ahab. "captain mayhew, stand by nowto receive it"; and taking the fatal missive from starbuck's hands,he caught it in the slit of the pole, and reached it over towards theboat. but as he did so, the oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing;the boat drifted a little towards the ship's stern; so that, as if bymagic, the letter suddenly ranged along with gabriel's eager hand.he clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-knife, and impalingthe letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship. it fell atahab's feet. then gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give waywith their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot awayfrom the pequod.as, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacketof the whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wildaffair.chapter 72. the monkey-rope.in the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale, thereis much running backwards and forwards among the crew. now hands arewanted here, and then again hands are wanted there. there is no stayingin any one place; for at one and the same time everything has to be doneeverywhere. it is much the same with him who endeavors the descriptionof the scene. we must now retrace our way a little. it was mentionedthat upon first breaking ground in the whale's back, the blubber-hookwas inserted into the original hole there cut by the spades of themates. but how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as that same hookget fixed in that hole? it was inserted there by my particular friendqueequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to descend upon themonster's back for the special purpose referred to. but in very manycases, circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on thewhale till the whole flensing or stripping operation is concluded. thewhale, be it observed, lies almost entirely submerged, excepting theimmediate parts operated upon. so down there, some ten feet below thelevel of the deck, the poor harpooneer flounders about, half on thewhale and half in the water, as the vast mass revolves like a tread-millbeneath him. on the occasion in question, queequeg figured in thehighland costume_a shirt and socks_in which to my eyes, at least,he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance toobserve him, as will presently be seen.being the savage's bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oarin his boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty toattend upon him while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the deadwhale's back. you have seen italian organ-boys holding a dancing-apeby a long cord. just so, from the ship's steep side, did i holdqueequeg down there in the sea, by what is technically called in thefishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of canvas belted roundhis waist.it was a humorously perilous business for both of us. for, before weproceed further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at bothends; fast to queequeg's broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrowleather one. so that for better or for worse, we two, for the time, werewedded; and should poor queequeg sink to rise no more, then both usageand honour demanded, that instead of cutting the cord, it should dragme down in his wake. so, then, an elongated siamese ligature united us.queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother; nor could i any way getrid of the dangerous liabilities which the hempen bond entailed.so strongly and metaphysically did i conceive of my situation then, thatwhile earnestly watching his motions, i seemed distinctly to perceivethat my own individuality was now merged in a joint stock company oftwo; that my free will had received a mortal wound; and that another'smistake or misfortune might plunge innocent me into unmerited disasterand death. therefore, i saw that here was a sort of interregnum inprovidence; for its even-handed equity never could have so gross aninjustice. and yet still further pondering_while i jerked him nowand then from between the whale and ship, which would threaten to jamhim_still further pondering, i say, i saw that this situation of minewas the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in mostcases, he, one way or other, has this siamese connexion with a pluralityof other mortals. if your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary bymistake sends you poison in your pills, you die. true, you may saythat, by exceeding caution, you may possibly escape these and themultitudinous other evil chances of life. but handle queequeg'smonkey-rope heedfully as i would, sometimes he jerked it so, that i camevery near sliding overboard. nor could i possibly forget that, do what iwould, i only had the management of one end of it.**the monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the pequodthat the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. this improvementupon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than stubb,in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possibleguarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder.i have hinted that i would often jerk poor queequeg from betweenthe whale and the ship_where he would occasionally fall, from theincessant rolling and swaying of both. but this was not the only jammingjeopardy he was exposed to. unappalled by the massacre made upon themduring the night, the sharks now freshly and more keenly allured bythe before pent blood which began to flow from the carcass_the rabidcreatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.and right in among those sharks was queequeg; who often pushed themaside with his floundering feet. a thing altogether incredible wereit not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwisemiscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom touch a man.nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such aravenous finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them.accordingly, besides the monkey-rope, with which i now and then jerkedthe poor fellow from too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemeda peculiarly ferocious shark_he was provided with still anotherprotection. suspended over the side in one of the stages, tashtegoand daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple of keenwhale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they couldreach. this procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested andbenevolent of them. they meant queequeg's best happiness, i admit; butin their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that bothhe and the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water,those indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a legthan a tail. but poor queequeg, i suppose, straining and gasping therewith that great iron hook_poor queequeg, i suppose, only prayed to hisyojo, and gave up his life into the hands of his gods.well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought i, as i drew inand then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea_what mattersit, after all? are you not the precious image of each and all of us menin this whaling world? that unsounded ocean you gasp in, is life; thosesharks, your foes; those spades, your friends; and what between sharksand spades you are in a sad pickle and peril, poor lad.but courage! there is good cheer in store for you, queequeg. for now, aswith blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbsup the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling overthe side; the steward advances, and with a benevolent, consolatoryglance hands him_what? some hot cognac? no! hands him, ye gods! handshim a cup of tepid ginger and water!"ginger? do i smell ginger?" suspiciously asked stubb, coming near."yes, this must be ginger," peering into the as yet untasted cup.then standing as if incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towardsthe astonished steward slowly saying, "ginger? ginger? and will youhave the goodness to tell me, mr. dough-boy, where lies the virtue ofginger? ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel you use, dough-boy, to kindlea fire in this shivering cannibal? ginger!_what the devil is ginger?sea-coal? firewood?_lucifer matches?_tinder?_gunpowder?_whatthe devil is ginger, i say, that you offer this cup to our poor queequeghere.""there is some sneaking temperance society movement about thisbusiness," he suddenly added, now approaching starbuck, who had justcome from forward. "will you look at that kannakin, sir; smell ofit, if you please." then watching the mate's countenance, he added,"the steward, mr. starbuck, had the face to offer that calomel andjalap to queequeg, there, this instant off the whale. is the steward anapothecary, sir? and may i ask whether this is the sort of bitters bywhich he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?""i trust not," said starbuck, "it is poor stuff enough.""aye, aye, steward," cried stubb, "we'll teach you to druga harpooneer; none of your apothecary's medicine here; you want topoison us, do ye? you have got out insurances on our lives and want tomurder us all, and pocket the proceeds, do ye?""it was not me," cried dough-boy, "it was aunt charity thatbrought the ginger on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers anyspirits, but only this ginger-jub_so she called it.""ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with yeto the lockers, and get something better. i hope i do no wrong, mr.starbuck. it is the captain's orders_grog for the harpooneer on awhale.""enough," replied starbuck, "only don't hit him again, but_""oh, i never hurt when i hit, except when i hit a whale or somethingof that sort; and this fellow's a weazel. what were you about saying,sir?""only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself."when stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a sortof tea-caddy in the other. the first contained strong spirits, and washanded to queequeg; the second was aunt charity's gift, and that wasfreely given to the waves.chapter 73. stubb and flask kill a right whale; and then have a talkover him.it must be borne in mind that all this time we have a sperm whale'sprodigious head hanging to the pequod's side. but we must let itcontinue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to it.for the present other matters press, and the best we can do now for thehead, is to pray heaven the tackles may hold.now, during the past night and forenoon, the pequod had graduallydrifted into a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit,gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of right whales, a species of theleviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurkinganywhere near. and though all hands commonly disdained the capture ofthose inferior creatures; and though the pequod was not commissioned tocruise for them at all, and though she had passed numbers of them nearthe crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that a sperm whalehad been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all, theannouncement was made that a right whale should be captured that day, ifopportunity offered.nor was this long wanting. tall spouts were seen to leeward; and twoboats, stubb's and flask's, were detached in pursuit. pullingfurther and further away, they at last became almost invisible to themen at the mast-head. but suddenly in the distance, they saw a greatheap of tumultuous white water, and soon after news came from aloft thatone or both the boats must be fast. an interval passed and the boatswere in plain sight, in the act of being dragged right towards the shipby the towing whale. so close did the monster come to the hull, that atfirst it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going down in amaelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared fromview, as if diving under the keel. "cut, cut!" was the cry from theship to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of beingbrought with a deadly dash against the vessel's side. but havingplenty of line yet in the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly,they paid out abundance of rope, and at the same time pulled withall their might so as to get ahead of the ship. for a few minutes thestruggle was intensely critical; for while they still slacked out thetightened line in one direction, and still plied their oars in another,the contending strain threatened to take them under. but it was only afew feet advance they sought to gain. and they stuck to it till they didgain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like lightningalong the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and soflinging off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of brokenglass on the water, while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and oncemore the boats were free to fly. but the fagged whale abated his speed,and blindly altering his course, went round the stern of the ship towingthe two boats after him, so that they performed a complete circuit.meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till closeflanking him on both sides, stubb answered flask with lance forlance; and thus round and round the pequod the battle went, while themultitudes of sharks that had before swum round the sperm whale'sbody, rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled, thirstily drinkingat every new gash, as the eager israelites did at the new burstingfountains that poured from the smitten rock.at last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, heturned upon his back a corpse.while the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes,and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, someconversation ensued between them."i wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard," saidstubb, not without some disgust at the thought of having to do with soignoble a leviathan."wants with it?" said flask, coiling some spare line in the boat'sbow, "did you never hear that the ship which but once has a spermwhale's head hoisted on her starboard side, and at the same time aright whale's on the larboard; did you never hear, stubb, that thatship can never afterwards capsize?""why not?"i don't know, but i heard that gamboge ghost of a fedallah sayingso, and he seems to know all about ships' charms. but i sometimesthink he'll charm the ship to no good at last. i don't half likethat chap, stubb. did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sort ofcarved into a snake's head, stubb?""sink him! i never look at him at all; but if ever i get a chance ofa dark night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; lookdown there, flask"_pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion ofboth hands_"aye, will i! flask, i take that fedallah to be the devilin disguise. do you believe that cock and bull story about his havingbeen stowed away on board ship? he's the devil, i say. the reason whyyou don't see his tail, is because he tucks it up out of sight; hecarries it coiled away in his pocket, i guess. blast him! now that ithink of it, he's always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes of hisboots.""he sleeps in his boots, don't he? he hasn't got any hammock; buti've seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.""no doubt, and it's because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, doye see, in the eye of the rigging.""what's the old man have so much to do with him for?""striking up a swap or a bargain, i suppose.""bargain?_about what?""why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that white whale, andthe devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap awayhis silver watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and thenhe'll surrender moby dick.""pooh! stubb, you are skylarking; how can fedallah do that?""i don't know, flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wickedone, i tell ye. why, they say as how he went a sauntering into theold flag-ship once, switching his tail about devilish easy andgentlemanlike, and inquiring if the old governor was at home. well, hewas at home, and asked the devil what he wanted. the devil, switchinghis hoofs, up and says, _i want john.' _what for?' says the oldgovernor. _what business is that of yours,' says the devil, gettingmad,__i want to use him.' _take him,' says the governor_andby the lord, flask, if the devil didn't give john the asiatic cholerabefore he got through with him, i'll eat this whale in one mouthful.but look sharp_ain't you all ready there? well, then, pull ahead,and let's get the whale alongside.""i think i remember some such story as you were telling," saidflask, when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with theirburden towards the ship, "but i can't remember where.""three spaniards? adventures of those three bloody-minded soladoes?did ye read it there, flask? i guess ye did?""no: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. but now, tell me,stubb, do you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, wasthe same you say is now on board the pequod?""am i the same man that helped kill this whale? doesn't the devillive for ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? did you eversee any parson a wearing mourning for the devil? and if the devil has alatch-key to get into the admiral's cabin, don't you suppose he cancrawl into a porthole? tell me that, mr. flask?""how old do you suppose fedallah is, stubb?""do you see that mainmast there?" pointing to the ship; "well,that's the figure one; now take all the hoops in the pequod's hold,and string along in a row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well,that wouldn't begin to be fedallah's age. nor all the coopers increation couldn't show hoops enough to make oughts enough.""but see here, stubb, i thought you a little boasted just now, thatyou meant to give fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. now, ifhe's so old as all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is goingto live for ever, what good will it do to pitch him overboard_tell methat?"give him a good ducking, anyhow.""but he'd crawl back.""duck him again; and keep ducking him.""suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though_yes,and drown you_what then?""i should like to see him try it; i'd give him such a pair of blackeyes that he wouldn't dare to show his face in the admiral's cabinagain for a long while, let alone down in the orlop there, where helives, and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much. damnthe devil, flask; so you suppose i'm afraid of the devil? who'safraid of him, except the old governor who daresn't catch him and puthim in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him go about kidnappingpeople; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the people the devilkidnapped, he'd roast for him? there's a governor!""do you suppose fedallah wants to kidnap captain ahab?""do i suppose it? you'll know it before long, flask. but i amgoing now to keep a sharp look-out on him; and if i see anything verysuspicious going on, i'll just take him by the nape of his neck, andsay_look here, beelzebub, you don't do it; and if he makes any fuss,by the lord i'll make a grab into his pocket for his tail, take it tothe capstan, and give him such a wrenching and heaving, that his tailwill come short off at the stump_do you see; and then, i rather guesswhen he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he'll sneak offwithout the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.""and what will you do with the tail, stubb?""do with it? sell it for an ox whip when we get home;_what else?""now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along,stubb?""mean or not mean, here we are at the ship."the boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side, wherefluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securinghim."didn't i tell you so?" said flask; "yes, you'll soon see thisright whale's head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti's."in good time, flask's saying proved true. as before, the pequodsteeply leaned over towards the sperm whale's head, now, by thecounterpoise of both heads, she regained her even keel; though sorelystrained, you may well believe. so, when on one side you hoist inlocke's head, you go over that way; but now, on the other side, hoistin kant's and you come back again; but in very poor plight. thus,some minds for ever keep trimming boat. oh, ye foolish! throw all thesethunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and right.in disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside theship, the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in thecase of a sperm whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut offwhole, but in the former the lips and tongue are separately removed andhoisted on deck, with all the well known black bone attached to what iscalled the crown-piece. but nothing like this, in the present case,had been done. the carcases of both whales had dropped astern; andthe head-laden ship not a little resembled a mule carrying a pair ofoverburdening panniers.meantime, fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale's head, and everand anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his ownhand. and ahab chanced so to stand, that the parsee occupied his shadow;while, if the parsee's shadow was there at all it seemed only toblend with, and lengthen ahab's. as the crew toiled on, laplandishspeculations were bandied among them, concerning all these passingthings.chapter 74. the sperm whale's head_contrasted view.here, now, are two great whales, laying their heads together; let usjoin them, and lay together our own.of the grand order of folio leviathans, the sperm whale and the rightwhale are by far the most noteworthy. they are the only whales regularlyhunted by man. to the nantucketer, they present the two extremes of allthe known varieties of the whale. as the external difference betweenthem is mainly observable in their heads; and as a head of each is thismoment hanging from the pequod's side; and as we may freely go fromone to the other, by merely stepping across the deck:_where, ishould like to know, will you obtain a better chance to study practicalcetology than here?in the first place, you are struck by the general contrast between theseheads. both are massive enough in all conscience; but there is a certainmathematical symmetry in the sperm whale's which the right whale'ssadly lacks. there is more character in the sperm whale's head. as youbehold it, you involuntarily yield the immense superiority to him, inpoint of pervading dignity. in the present instance, too, this dignityis heightened by the pepper and salt colour of his head at the summit,giving token of advanced age and large experience. in short, he is whatthe fishermen technically call a "grey-headed whale."let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads_namely, thetwo most important organs, the eye and the ear. far back on the side ofthe head, and low down, near the angle of either whale's jaw, if younarrowly search, you will at last see a lashless eye, which you wouldfancy to be a young colt's eye; so out of all proportion is it to themagnitude of the head.now, from this peculiar sideway position of the whale's eyes, it isplain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead, no morethan he can one exactly astern. in a word, the position of the whale'seyes corresponds to that of a man's ears; and you may fancy, foryourself, how it would fare with you, did you sideways survey objectsthrough your ears. you would find that you could only command somethirty degrees of vision in advance of the straight side-line of sight;and about thirty more behind it. if your bitterest foe were walkingstraight towards you, with dagger uplifted in broad day, you would notbe able to see him, any more than if he were stealing upon you frombehind. in a word, you would have two backs, so to speak; but, at thesame time, also, two fronts (side fronts): for what is it that makes thefront of a man_what, indeed, but his eyes?moreover, while in most other animals that i can now think of, the eyesare so planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power, so as toproduce one picture and not two to the brain; the peculiar position ofthe whale's eyes, effectually divided as they are by many cubicfeet of solid head, which towers between them like a great mountainseparating two lakes in valleys; this, of course, must wholly separatethe impressions which each independent organ imparts. the whale,therefore, must see one distinct picture on this side, and anotherdistinct picture on that side; while all between must be profounddarkness and nothingness to him. man may, in effect, be said to look outon the world from a sentry-box with two joined sashes for his window.but with the whale, these two sashes are separately inserted, making twodistinct windows, but sadly impairing the view. this peculiarity of thewhale's eyes is a thing always to be borne in mind in the fishery; andto be remembered by the reader in some subsequent scenes.a curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning thisvisual matter as touching the leviathan. but i must be content with ahint. so long as a man's eyes are open in the light, the act ofseeing is involuntary; that is, he cannot then help mechanically seeingwhatever objects are before him. nevertheless, any one's experiencewill teach him, that though he can take in an undiscriminating sweep ofthings at one glance, it is quite impossible for him, attentively,and completely, to examine any two things_however large or howeversmall_at one and the same instant of time; never mind if they lie sideby side and touch each other. but if you now come to separate these twoobjects, and surround each by a circle of profound darkness; then, inorder to see one of them, in such a manner as to bring your mind tobear on it, the other will be utterly excluded from your contemporaryconsciousness. how is it, then, with the whale? true, both his eyes,in themselves, must simultaneously act; but is his brain so much morecomprehensive, combining, and subtle than man's, that he can at thesame moment of time attentively examine two distinct prospects, one onone side of him, and the other in an exactly opposite direction? ifhe can, then is it as marvellous a thing in him, as if a man were ablesimultaneously to go through the demonstrations of two distinct problemsin euclid. nor, strictly investigated, is there any incongruity in thiscomparison.it may be but an idle whim, but it has always seemed to me, that theextraordinary vacillations of movement displayed by some whales whenbeset by three or four boats; the timidity and liability to queerfrights, so common to such whales; i think that all this indirectlyproceeds from the helpless perplexity of volition, in which theirdivided and diametrically opposite powers of vision must involve them.but the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye. if you are anentire stranger to their race, you might hunt over these two headsfor hours, and never discover that organ. the ear has no external leafwhatever; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert a quill, sowondrously minute is it. it is lodged a little behind the eye. withrespect to their ears, this important difference is to be observedbetween the sperm whale and the right. while the ear of the former hasan external opening, that of the latter is entirely and evenly coveredover with a membrane, so as to be quite imperceptible from without.is it not curious, that so vast a being as the whale should see theworld through so small an eye, and hear the thunder through an ear whichis smaller than a hare's? but if his eyes were broad as the lens ofherschel's great telescope; and his ears capacious as the porchesof cathedrals; would that make him any longer of sight, or sharper ofhearing? not at all._why then do you try to "enlarge" your mind?subtilize it.let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand,cant over the sperm whale's head, that it may lie bottom up; then,ascending by a ladder to the summit, have a peep down the mouth; andwere it not that the body is now completely separated from it, with alantern we might descend into the great kentucky mammoth cave of hisstomach. but let us hold on here by this tooth, and look about us wherewe are. what a really beautiful and chaste-looking mouth! from floorto ceiling, lined, or rather papered with a glistening white membrane,glossy as bridal satins.but come out now, and look at this portentous lower jaw, which seemslike the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box, with the hinge at oneend, instead of one side. if you pry it up, so as to get it overhead,and expose its rows of teeth, it seems a terrific portcullis; and such,alas! it proves to many a poor wight in the fishery, upon whom thesespikes fall with impaling force. but far more terrible is it to behold,when fathoms down in the sea, you see some sulky whale, floating theresuspended, with his prodigious jaw, some fifteen feet long, hangingstraight down at right-angles with his body, for all the world like aship's jib-boom. this whale is not dead; he is only dispirited; out ofsorts, perhaps; hypochondriac; and so supine, that the hinges of hisjaw have relaxed, leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight, areproach to all his tribe, who must, no doubt, imprecate lock-jaws uponhim.in most cases this lower jaw_being easily unhinged by a practisedartist_is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extractingthe ivory teeth, and furnishing a supply of that hard white whalebonewith which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious articles,including canes, umbrella-stocks, and handles to riding-whips.with a long, weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board, as if it were ananchor; and when the proper time comes_some few days after the otherwork_queequeg, daggoo, and tashtego, being all accomplished dentists,are set to drawing teeth. with a keen cutting-spade, queequeg lancesthe gums; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts, and a tackle beingrigged from aloft, they drag out these teeth, as michigan oxen dragstumps of old oaks out of wild wood lands. there are generally forty-twoteeth in all; in old whales, much worn down, but undecayed; nor filledafter our artificial fashion. the jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs, andpiled away like joists for building houses.chapter 75. the right whale's head_contrasted view.crossing the deck, let us now have a good long look at the rightwhale's head.as in general shape the noble sperm whale's head may be compared to aroman war-chariot (especially in front, where it is so broadly rounded);so, at a broad view, the right whale's head bears a rather inelegantresemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe. two hundred years ago anold dutch voyager likened its shape to that of a shoemaker's last. andin this same last or shoe, that old woman of the nursery tale, withthe swarming brood, might very comfortably be lodged, she and all herprogeny.but as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume differentaspects, according to your point of view. if you stand on its summit andlook at these two f-shaped spoutholes, you would take the whole headfor an enormous bass-viol, and these spiracles, the apertures in itssounding-board. then, again, if you fix your eye upon this strange,crested, comb-like incrustation on the top of the mass_this green,barnacled thing, which the greenlanders call the "crown," and thesouthern fishers the "bonnet" of the right whale; fixing your eyessolely on this, you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak,with a bird's nest in its crotch. at any rate, when you watch thoselive crabs that nestle here on this bonnet, such an idea will be almostsure to occur to you; unless, indeed, your fancy has been fixed by thetechnical term "crown" also bestowed upon it; in which case you willtake great interest in thinking how this mighty monster is actually adiademed king of the sea, whose green crown has been put together forhim in this marvellous manner. but if this whale be a king, he is a verysulky looking fellow to grace a diadem. look at that hanging lower lip!what a huge sulk and pout is there! a sulk and pout, by carpenter'smeasurement, about twenty feet long and five feet deep; a sulk and poutthat will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more.a great pity, now, that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped.the fissure is about a foot across. probably the mother during animportant interval was sailing down the peruvian coast, when earthquakescaused the beach to gape. over this lip, as over a slippery threshold,we now slide into the mouth. upon my word were i at mackinaw, i shouldtake this to be the inside of an indian wigwam. good lord! is this theroad that jonah went? the roof is about twelve feet high, and runs to apretty sharp angle, as if there were a regular ridge-pole there; whilethese ribbed, arched, hairy sides, present us with those wondrous, halfvertical, scimetar-shaped slats of whalebone, say three hundred on aside, which depending from the upper part of the head or crownbone, form those venetian blinds which have elsewhere been cursorilymentioned. the edges of these bones are fringed with hairy fibres,through which the right whale strains the water, and in whoseintricacies he retains the small fish, when openmouthed he goes throughthe seas of brit in feeding time. in the central blinds of bone, as theystand in their natural order, there are certain curious marks, curves,hollows, and ridges, whereby some whalemen calculate the creature'sage, as the age of an oak by its circular rings. though the certaintyof this criterion is far from demonstrable, yet it has the savor ofanalogical probability. at any rate, if we yield to it, we must granta far greater age to the right whale than at first glance will seemreasonable.in old times, there seem to have prevailed the most curious fanciesconcerning these blinds. one voyager in purchas calls them the wondrous"whiskers" inside of the whale's mouth;* another, "hogs'bristles"; a third old gentleman in hackluyt uses the followingelegant language: "there are about two hundred and fifty fins growingon each side of his upper chop, which arch over his tongue on each sideof his mouth."*this reminds us that the right whale really has a sort of whisker, orrather a moustache, consisting of a few scattered white hairs on theupper part of the outer end of the lower jaw. sometimes thesetufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemncountenance.as every one knows, these same "hogs' bristles," "fins,""whiskers," "blinds," or whatever you please, furnish to theladies their busks and other stiffening contrivances. but in thisparticular, the demand has long been on the decline. it was in queenanne's time that the bone was in its glory, the farthingale being thenall the fashion. and as those ancient dames moved about gaily, thoughin the jaws of the whale, as you may say; even so, in a shower, withthe like thoughtlessness, do we nowadays fly under the same jaws forprotection; the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone.but now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment, and, standingin the right whale's mouth, look around you afresh. seeing all thesecolonnades of bone so methodically ranged about, would you not thinkyou were inside of the great haarlem organ, and gazing upon itsthousand pipes? for a carpet to the organ we have a rug of the softestturkey_the tongue, which is glued, as it were, to the floor of themouth. it is very fat and tender, and apt to tear in pieces in hoistingit on deck. this particular tongue now before us; at a passing glance ishould say it was a six-barreler; that is, it will yield you about thatamount of oil.ere this, you must have plainly seen the truth of what i startedwith_that the sperm whale and the right whale have almost entirelydifferent heads. to sum up, then: in the right whale's there is nogreat well of sperm; no ivory teeth at all; no long, slender mandible ofa lower jaw, like the sperm whale's. nor in the sperm whale are thereany of those blinds of bone; no huge lower lip; and scarcely anything ofa tongue. again, the right whale has two external spout-holes, the spermwhale only one.look your last, now, on these venerable hooded heads, while they yet lietogether; for one will soon sink, unrecorded, in the sea; the other willnot be very long in following.can you catch the expression of the sperm whale's there? it is thesame he died with, only some of the longer wrinkles in the foreheadseem now faded away. i think his broad brow to be full of a prairie-likeplacidity, born of a speculative indifference as to death. but markthe other head's expression. see that amazing lower lip, pressed byaccident against the vessel's side, so as firmly to embrace thejaw. does not this whole head seem to speak of an enormous practicalresolution in facing death? this right whale i take to have been astoic; the sperm whale, a platonian, who might have taken up spinoza inhis latter years.chapter 76. the battering-ram.ere quitting, for the nonce, the sperm whale's head, i would haveyou, as a sensible physiologist, simply_particularly remark its frontaspect, in all its compacted collectedness. i would have you investigateit now with the sole view of forming to yourself some unexaggerated,intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may be lodgedthere. here is a vital point; for you must either satisfactorily settlethis matter with yourself, or for ever remain an infidel as to one ofthe most appalling, but not the less true events, perhaps anywhere to befound in all recorded history.you observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the sperm whale,the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane to thewater; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes considerablybackwards, so as to furnish more of a retreat for the long socket whichreceives the boom-like lower jaw; you observe that the mouth is entirelyunder the head, much in the same way, indeed, as though your own mouthwere entirely under your chin. moreover you observe that the whale hasno external nose; and that what nose he has_his spout hole_is on thetop of his head; you observe that his eyes and ears are at the sidesof his head, nearly one third of his entire length from the front.wherefore, you must now have perceived that the front of the spermwhale's head is a dead, blind wall, without a single organ or tenderprominence of any sort whatsoever. furthermore, you are now to considerthat only in the extreme, lower, backward sloping part of the front ofthe head, is there the slightest vestige of bone; and not till youget near twenty feet from the forehead do you come to the full cranialdevelopment. so that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad.finally, though, as will soon be revealed, its contents partly comprisethe most delicate oil; yet, you are now to be apprised of the nature ofthe substance which so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy.in some previous place i have described to you how the blubber wraps thebody of the whale, as the rind wraps an orange. just so with the head;but with this difference: about the head this envelope, though not sothick, is of a boneless toughness, inestimable by any man who has nothandled it. the severest pointed harpoon, the sharpest lance darted bythe strongest human arm, impotently rebounds from it. it is as thoughthe forehead of the sperm whale were paved with horses' hoofs. i donot think that any sensation lurks in it.bethink yourself also of another thing. when two large, loaded indiamenchance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks, what do thesailors do? they do not suspend between them, at the point of comingcontact, any merely hard substance, like iron or wood. no, they holdthere a large, round wad of tow and cork, enveloped in the thickestand toughest of ox-hide. that bravely and uninjured takes the jam whichwould have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars. byitself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact i drive at. butsupplementary to this, it has hypothetically occurred to me, thatas ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder in them,capable, at will, of distension or contraction; and as the sperm whale,as far as i know, has no such provision in him; considering, too,the otherwise inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his headaltogether beneath the surface, and anon swims with it high elevated outof the water; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope;considering the unique interior of his head; it has hypotheticallyoccurred to me, i say, that those mystical lung-celled honeycombs theremay possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspected connexion withthe outer air, so as to be susceptible to atmospheric distension andcontraction. if this be so, fancy the irresistibleness of that might, towhich the most impalpable and destructive of all elements contributes.now, mark. unerringly impelling this dead, impregnable, uninjurablewall, and this most buoyant thing within; there swims behind it all amass of tremendous life, only to be adequately estimated as piled woodis_by the cord; and all obedient to one volition, as the smallestinsect. so that when i shall hereafter detail to you all thespecialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in thisexpansive monster; when i shall show you some of his more inconsiderablebraining feats; i trust you will have renounced all ignorantincredulity, and be ready to abide by this; that though the sperm whalestove a passage through the isthmus of darien, and mixed the atlanticwith the pacific, you would not elevate one hair of your eye-brow. forunless you own the whale, you are but a provincial and sentimentalistin truth. but clear truth is a thing for salamander giants only toencounter; how small the chances for the provincials then? what befellthe weakling youth lifting the dread goddess's veil at lais?chapter 77. the great heidelburgh tun.now comes the baling of the case. but to comprehend it aright, you mustknow something of the curious internal structure of the thing operatedupon.regarding the sperm whale's head as a solid oblong, you may, on aninclined plane, sideways divide it into two quoins,* whereof the loweris the bony structure, forming the cranium and jaws, and the upper anunctuous mass wholly free from bones; its broad forward end forming theexpanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale. at the middle of theforehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin, and then you have twoalmost equal parts, which before were naturally divided by an internalwall of a thick tendinous substance.*quoin is not a euclidean term. it belongs to the pure nauticalmathematics. i know not that it has been defined before. a quoin is asolid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by thesteep inclination of one side, instead of the mutual tapering of bothsides.the lower subdivided part, called the junk, is one immense honeycombof oil, formed by the crossing and recrossing, into ten thousandinfiltrated cells, of tough elastic white fibres throughout its wholeextent. the upper part, known as the case, may be regarded as the greatheidelburgh tun of the sperm whale. and as that famous great tierce ismystically carved in front, so the whale's vast plaited foreheadforms innumerable strange devices for the emblematical adornment of hiswondrous tun. moreover, as that of heidelburgh was always replenishedwith the most excellent of the wines of the rhenish valleys, so the tunof the whale contains by far the most precious of all his oily vintages;namely, the highly-prized spermaceti, in its absolutely pure, limpid,and odoriferous state. nor is this precious substance found unalloyedin any other part of the creature. though in life it remains perfectlyfluid, yet, upon exposure to the air, after death, it soon begins toconcrete; sending forth beautiful crystalline shoots, as when the firstthin delicate ice is just forming in water. a large whale's casegenerally yields about five hundred gallons of sperm, though fromunavoidable circumstances, considerable of it is spilled, leaks, anddribbles away, or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish businessof securing what you can.i know not with what fine and costly material the heidelburgh tunwas coated within, but in superlative richness that coating could notpossibly have compared with the silken pearl-coloured membrane, likethe lining of a fine pelisse, forming the inner surface of the spermwhale's case.it will have been seen that the heidelburgh tun of the sperm whaleembraces the entire length of the entire top of the head; and since_ashas been elsewhere set forth_the head embraces one third of the wholelength of the creature, then setting that length down at eighty feet fora good sized whale, you have more than twenty-six feet for the depth ofthe tun, when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a ship'sside.as in decapitating the whale, the operator's instrument is broughtclose to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into thespermaceti magazine; he has, therefore, to be uncommonly heedful, lest acareless, untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and wastingly letout its invaluable contents. it is this decapitated end of the head,also, which is at last elevated out of the water, and retained in thatposition by the enormous cutting tackles, whose hempen combinations, onone side, make quite a wilderness of ropes in that quarter.thus much being said, attend now, i pray you, to that marvellousand_in this particular instance_almost fatal operation whereby thesperm whale's great heidelburgh tun is tapped.chapter 78. cistern and buckets.nimble as a cat, tashtego mounts aloft; and without altering his erectposture, runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm, to thepart where it exactly projects over the hoisted tun. he has carriedwith him a light tackle called a whip, consisting of only two parts,travelling through a single-sheaved block. securing this block, so thatit hangs down from the yard-arm, he swings one end of the rope, till itis caught and firmly held by a hand on deck. then, hand-over-hand, downthe other part, the indian drops through the air, till dexterously helands on the summit of the head. there_still high elevated abovethe rest of the company, to whom he vivaciously cries_he seems someturkish muezzin calling the good people to prayers from the top of atower. a short-handled sharp spade being sent up to him, he diligentlysearches for the proper place to begin breaking into the tun. in thisbusiness he proceeds very heedfully, like a treasure-hunter in some oldhouse, sounding the walls to find where the gold is masoned in. by thetime this cautious search is over, a stout iron-bound bucket, preciselylike a well-bucket, has been attached to one end of the whip; whilethe other end, being stretched across the deck, is there held by two orthree alert hands. these last now hoist the bucket within grasp ofthe indian, to whom another person has reached up a very long pole.inserting this pole into the bucket, tashtego downward guides the bucketinto the tun, till it entirely disappears; then giving the word tothe seamen at the whip, up comes the bucket again, all bubbling like adairy-maid's pail of new milk. carefully lowered from its height,the full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed hand, and quicklyemptied into a large tub. then remounting aloft, it again goes throughthe same round until the deep cistern will yield no more. towards theend, tashtego has to ram his long pole harder and harder, and deeper anddeeper into the tun, until some twenty feet of the pole have gone down.now, the people of the pequod had been baling some time in this way;several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm; when all at once aqueer accident happened. whether it was that tashtego, that wild indian,was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment his one-handedhold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head; or whether theplace where he stood was so treacherous and oozy; or whether the evilone himself would have it to fall out so, without stating his particularreasons; how it was exactly, there is no telling now; but, on a sudden,as the eightieth or ninetieth bucket came suckingly up_my god! poortashtego_like the twin reciprocating bucket in a veritable well,dropped head-foremost down into this great tun of heidelburgh, and witha horrible oily gurgling, went clean out of sight!"man overboard!" cried daggoo, who amid the general consternationfirst came to his senses. "swing the bucket this way!" and puttingone foot into it, so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold onthe whip itself, the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head,almost before tashtego could have reached its interior bottom. meantime,there was a terrible tumult. looking over the side, they saw the beforelifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the surface of the sea,as if that moment seized with some momentous idea; whereas it was onlythe poor indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilousdepth to which he had sunk.at this instant, while daggoo, on the summit of the head, was clearingthe whip_which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles_asharp cracking noise was heard; and to the unspeakable horror of all,one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out, and witha vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung, till the drunk shipreeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg. the one remaining hook,upon which the entire strain now depended, seemed every instant to beon the point of giving way; an event still more likely from the violentmotions of the head."come down, come down!" yelled the seamen to daggoo, but with onehand holding on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head should drop,he would still remain suspended; the negro having cleared the foul line,rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well, meaning that theburied harpooneer should grasp it, and so be hoisted out."in heaven's name, man," cried stubb, "are you ramming homea cartridge there?_avast! how will that help him; jamming thatiron-bound bucket on top of his head? avast, will ye!""stand clear of the tackle!" cried a voice like the bursting of arocket.almost in the same instant, with a thunder-boom, the enormous massdropped into the sea, like niagara's table-rock into the whirlpool;the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it, to far down herglittering copper; and all caught their breath, as half swinging_nowover the sailors' heads, and now over the water_daggoo, through athick mist of spray, was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles,while poor, buried-alive tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottomof the sea! but hardly had the blinding vapour cleared away, when anaked figure with a boarding-sword in his hand, was for one swift momentseen hovering over the bulwarks. the next, a loud splash announced thatmy brave queequeg had dived to the rescue. one packed rush was made tothe side, and every eye counted every ripple, as moment followed moment,and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen. some handsnow jumped into a boat alongside, and pushed a little off from the ship."ha! ha!" cried daggoo, all at once, from his now quiet, swingingperch overhead; and looking further off from the side, we saw an armthrust upright from the blue waves; a sight strange to see, as an armthrust forth from the grass over a grave."both! both!_it is both!"_cried daggoo again with a joyfulshout; and soon after, queequeg was seen boldly striking out with onehand, and with the other clutching the long hair of the indian. drawninto the waiting boat, they were quickly brought to the deck; buttashtego was long in coming to, and queequeg did not look very brisk.now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished? why, diving afterthe slowly descending head, queequeg with his keen sword had madeside lunges near its bottom, so as to scuttle a large hole there; thendropping his sword, had thrust his long arm far inwards and upwards,and so hauled out poor tash by the head. he averred, that upon firstthrusting in for him, a leg was presented; but well knowing that thatwas not as it ought to be, and might occasion great trouble;_he hadthrust back the leg, and by a dexterous heave and toss, had wrought asomerset upon the indian; so that with the next trial, he came forth inthe good old way_head foremost. as for the great head itself, that wasdoing as well as could be expected.and thus, through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of queequeg,the deliverance, or rather, delivery of tashtego, was successfullyaccomplished, in the teeth, too, of the most untoward and apparentlyhopeless impediments; which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten.midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing,riding and rowing.i know that this queer adventure of the gay-header's will be sure toseem incredible to some landsmen, though they themselves may have eitherseen or heard of some one's falling into a cistern ashore; an accidentwhich not seldom happens, and with much less reason too than theindian's, considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of thesperm whale's well.but, peradventure, it may be sagaciously urged, how is this? we thoughtthe tissued, infiltrated head of the sperm whale, was the lightest andmost corky part about him; and yet thou makest it sink in an element ofa far greater specific gravity than itself. we have thee there. not atall, but i have ye; for at the time poor tash fell in, the case had beennearly emptied of its lighter contents, leaving little but the densetendinous wall of the well_a double welded, hammered substance, as ihave before said, much heavier than the sea water, and a lump of whichsinks in it like lead almost. but the tendency to rapid sinking in thissubstance was in the present instance materially counteracted by theother parts of the head remaining undetached from it, so that it sankvery slowly and deliberately indeed, affording queequeg a fair chancefor performing his agile obstetrics on the run, as you may say. yes, itwas a running delivery, so it was.now, had tashtego perished in that head, it had been a very preciousperishing; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrantspermaceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in the secret inner chamberand sanctum sanctorum of the whale. only one sweeter end can readilybe recalled_the delicious death of an ohio honey-hunter, who seekinghoney in the crotch of a hollow tree, found such exceeding store of it,that leaning too far over, it sucked him in, so that he died embalmed.how many, think ye, have likewise fallen into plato's honey head, andsweetly perished there?chapter 79. the prairie.to scan the lines of his face, or feel the bumps on the head of thisleviathan; this is a thing which no physiognomist or phrenologist has asyet undertaken. such an enterprise would seem almost as hopeful as forlavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the rock of gibraltar,or for gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated the dome of thepantheon. still, in that famous work of his, lavater not only treatsof the various faces of men, but also attentively studies the facesof horses, birds, serpents, and fish; and dwells in detail upon themodifications of expression discernible therein. nor have gall andhis disciple spurzheim failed to throw out some hints touching thephrenological characteristics of other beings than man. therefore,though i am but ill qualified for a pioneer, in the application of thesetwo semi-sciences to the whale, i will do my endeavor. i try all things;i achieve what i can.physiognomically regarded, the sperm whale is an anomalous creature.he has no proper nose. and since the nose is the central and mostconspicuous of the features; and since it perhaps most modifies andfinally controls their combined expression; hence it would seem that itsentire absence, as an external appendage, must very largely affectthe countenance of the whale. for as in landscape gardening, a spire,cupola, monument, or tower of some sort, is deemed almost indispensableto the completion of the scene; so no face can be physiognomically inkeeping without the elevated open-work belfry of the nose. dash the nosefrom phidias's marble jove, and what a sorry remainder! nevertheless,leviathan is of so mighty a magnitude, all his proportions are sostately, that the same deficiency which in the sculptured jove werehideous, in him is no blemish at all. nay, it is an added grandeur. anose to the whale would have been impertinent. as on your physiognomicalvoyage you sail round his vast head in your jolly-boat, your nobleconceptions of him are never insulted by the reflection that he has anose to be pulled. a pestilent conceit, which so often will insist uponobtruding even when beholding the mightiest royal beadle on his throne.in some particulars, perhaps the most imposing physiognomical view tobe had of the sperm whale, is that of the full front of his head. thisaspect is sublime.in thought, a fine human brow is like the east when troubled with themorning. in the repose of the pasture, the curled brow of the bull has atouch of the grand in it. pushing heavy cannon up mountain defiles, theelephant's brow is majestic. human or animal, the mystical brow is asthat great golden seal affixed by the german emperors to their decrees.it signifies_"god: done this day by my hand." but in mostcreatures, nay in man himself, very often the brow is but a mere stripof alpine land lying along the snow line. few are the foreheads whichlike shakespeare's or melancthon's rise so high, and descend so low,that the eyes themselves seem clear, eternal, tideless mountain lakes;and all above them in the forehead's wrinkles, you seem to track theantlered thoughts descending there to drink, as the highland hunterstrack the snow prints of the deer. but in the great sperm whale, thishigh and mighty god-like dignity inherent in the brow is so immenselyamplified, that gazing on it, in that full front view, you feel thedeity and the dread powers more forcibly than in beholding any otherobject in living nature. for you see no one point precisely; not onedistinct feature is revealed; no nose, eyes, ears, or mouth; no face;he has none, proper; nothing but that one broad firmament of a forehead,pleated with riddles; dumbly lowering with the doom of boats, and ships,and men. nor, in profile, does this wondrous brow diminish; though thatway viewed its grandeur does not domineer upon you so. in profile, youplainly perceive that horizontal, semi-crescentic depression in theforehead's middle, which, in man, is lavater's mark of genius.but how? genius in the sperm whale? has the sperm whale ever writtena book, spoken a speech? no, his great genius is declared in hisdoing nothing particular to prove it. it is moreover declared in hispyramidical silence. and this reminds me that had the great sperm whalebeen known to the young orient world, he would have been deified bytheir child-magian thoughts. they deified the crocodile of the nile,because the crocodile is tongueless; and the sperm whale has notongue, or at least it is so exceedingly small, as to be incapable ofprotrusion. if hereafter any highly cultured, poetical nation shall lureback to their birth-right, the merry may-day gods of old; and livinglyenthrone them again in the now egotistical sky; in the now unhauntedhill; then be sure, exalted to jove's high seat, the great sperm whaleshall lord it.champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics. but thereis no champollion to decipher the egypt of every man's and everybeing's face. physiognomy, like every other human science, is but apassing fable. if then, sir william jones, who read in thirty languages,could not read the simplest peasant's face in its profounder andmore subtle meanings, how may unlettered ishmael hope to read the awfulchaldee of the sperm whale's brow? i but put that brow before you.read it if you can.chapter 80. the nut.if the sperm whale be physiognomically a sphinx, to the phrenologist hisbrain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible to square.in the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty feetin length. unhinge the lower jaw, and the side view of this skull is asthe side of a moderately inclined plane resting throughout on a levelbase. but in life_as we have elsewhere seen_this inclined plane isangularly filled up, and almost squared by the enormous superincumbentmass of the junk and sperm. at the high end the skull forms a craterto bed that part of the mass; while under the long floor of thiscrater_in another cavity seldom exceeding ten inches in length and asmany in depth_reposes the mere handful of this monster's brain. thebrain is at least twenty feet from his apparent forehead in life; it ishidden away behind its vast outworks, like the innermost citadel withinthe amplified fortifications of quebec. so like a choice casket is itsecreted in him, that i have known some whalemen who peremptorily denythat the sperm whale has any other brain than that palpable semblanceof one formed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine. lying in strangefolds, courses, and convolutions, to their apprehensions, it seems morein keeping with the idea of his general might to regard that mystic partof him as the seat of his intelligence.it is plain, then, that phrenologically the head of this leviathan, inthe creature's living intact state, is an entire delusion. as for histrue brain, you can then see no indications of it, nor feel any. thewhale, like all things that are mighty, wears a false brow to the commonworld.if you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear viewof its rear end, which is the high end, you will be struck by itsresemblance to the human skull, beheld in the same situation, and fromthe same point of view. indeed, place this reversed skull (scaled downto the human magnitude) among a plate of men's skulls, and you wouldinvoluntarily confound it with them; and remarking the depressions onone part of its summit, in phrenological phrase you would say_thisman had no self-esteem, and no veneration. and by those negations,considered along with the affirmative fact of his prodigious bulk andpower, you can best form to yourself the truest, though not the mostexhilarating conception of what the most exalted potency is.but if from the comparative dimensions of the whale's proper brain,you deem it incapable of being adequately charted, then i have anotheridea for you. if you attentively regard almost any quadruped's spine,you will be struck with the resemblance of its vertebrae to a strungnecklace of dwarfed skulls, all bearing rudimental resemblance to theskull proper. it is a german conceit, that the vertebrae are absolutelyundeveloped skulls. but the curious external resemblance, i take itthe germans were not the first men to perceive. a foreign friend oncepointed it out to me, in the skeleton of a foe he had slain, and withthe vertebrae of which he was inlaying, in a sort of basso-relievo, thebeaked prow of his canoe. now, i consider that the phrenologists haveomitted an important thing in not pushing their investigations fromthe cerebellum through the spinal canal. for i believe that much ofa man's character will be found betokened in his backbone. i wouldrather feel your spine than your skull, whoever you are. a thin joist ofa spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul. i rejoice in my spine,as in the firm audacious staff of that flag which i fling half out tothe world.apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the sperm whale. his cranialcavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra; and in that vertebrathe bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inches across, beingeight in height, and of a triangular figure with the base downwards. asit passes through the remaining vertebrae the canal tapers in size, butfor a considerable distance remains of large capacity. now, ofcourse, this canal is filled with much the same strangely fibroussubstance_the spinal cord_as the brain; and directly communicateswith the brain. and what is still more, for many feet after emergingfrom the brain's cavity, the spinal cord remains of an undecreasinggirth, almost equal to that of the brain. under all these circumstances,would it be unreasonable to survey and map out the whale's spinephrenologically? for, viewed in this light, the wonderful comparativesmallness of his brain proper is more than compensated by the wonderfulcomparative magnitude of his spinal cord.but leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists, iwould merely assume the spinal theory for a moment, in reference to thesperm whale's hump. this august hump, if i mistake not, rises overone of the larger vertebrae, and is, therefore, in some sort, the outerconvex mould of it. from its relative situation then, i should call thishigh hump the organ of firmness or indomitableness in the sperm whale.and that the great monster is indomitable, you will yet have reason toknow.chapter 81. the pequod meets the virgin.the predestinated day arrived, and we duly met the ship jungfrau, derickde deer, master, of bremen.at one time the greatest whaling people in the world, the dutch andgermans are now among the least; but here and there at very wideintervals of latitude and longitude, you still occasionally meet withtheir flag in the pacific.for some reason, the jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects.while yet some distance from the pequod, she rounded to, and dropping aboat, her captain was impelled towards us, impatiently standing in thebows instead of the stern."what has he in his hand there?" cried starbuck, pointingto something wavingly held by the german. "impossible!_alamp-feeder!""not that," said stubb, "no, no, it's a coffee-pot, mr.starbuck; he's coming off to make us our coffee, is the yarman;don't you see that big tin can there alongside of him?_that's hisboiling water. oh! he's all right, is the yarman.""go along with you," cried flask, "it's a lamp-feeder and anoil-can. he's out of oil, and has come a-begging."however curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing oil on thewhale-ground, and however much it may invertedly contradict the oldproverb about carrying coals to newcastle, yet sometimes such a thingreally happens; and in the present case captain derick de deer didindubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as flask did declare.as he mounted the deck, ahab abruptly accosted him, without at allheeding what he had in his hand; but in his broken lingo, the germansoon evinced his complete ignorance of the white whale; immediatelyturning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can, with someremarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at night inprofound darkness_his last drop of bremen oil being gone, and not asingle flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency; concludingby hinting that his ship was indeed what in the fishery is technicallycalled a clean one (that is, an empty one), well deserving the name ofjungfrau or the virgin.his necessities supplied, derick departed; but he had not gained hisship's side, when whales were almost simultaneously raised from themast-heads of both vessels; and so eager for the chase was derick, thatwithout pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard, he slewedround his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders.now, the game having risen to leeward, he and the other three germanboats that soon followed him, had considerably the start of thepequod's keels. there were eight whales, an average pod. aware oftheir danger, they were going all abreast with great speed straightbefore the wind, rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans ofhorses in harness. they left a great, wide wake, as though continuallyunrolling a great wide parchment upon the sea.full in this rapid wake, and many fathoms in the rear, swam a huge,humped old bull, which by his comparatively slow progress, as well asby the unusual yellowish incrustations overgrowing him, seemed afflictedwith the jaundice, or some other infirmity. whether this whale belongedto the pod in advance, seemed questionable; for it is not customary forsuch venerable leviathans to be at all social. nevertheless, he stuckto their wake, though indeed their back water must have retarded him,because the white-bone or swell at his broad muzzle was a dashed one,like the swell formed when two hostile currents meet. his spout wasshort, slow, and laborious; coming forth with a choking sort of gush,and spending itself in torn shreds, followed by strange subterraneancommotions in him, which seemed to have egress at his other buriedextremity, causing the waters behind him to upbubble."who's got some paregoric?" said stubb, "he has thestomach-ache, i'm afraid. lord, think of having half an acre ofstomach-ache! adverse winds are holding mad christmas in him, boys.it's the first foul wind i ever knew to blow from astern; but look,did ever whale yaw so before? it must be, he's lost his tiller."as an overladen indiaman bearing down the hindostan coast with a deckload of frightened horses, careens, buries, rolls, and wallows on herway; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk, and now and then partlyturning over on his cumbrous rib-ends, expose the cause of his deviouswake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin. whether he had lostthat fin in battle, or had been born without it, it were hard to say."only wait a bit, old chap, and i'll give ye a sling for thatwounded arm," cried cruel flask, pointing to the whale-line near him."mind he don't sling thee with it," cried starbuck. "give way,or the german will have him."with one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for thisone fish, because not only was he the largest, and therefore the mostvaluable whale, but he was nearest to them, and the other whales weregoing with such great velocity, moreover, as almost to defy pursuit forthe time. at this juncture the pequod's keels had shot by thethree german boats last lowered; but from the great start he had had,derick's boat still led the chase, though every moment neared by hisforeign rivals. the only thing they feared, was, that from being alreadyso nigh to his mark, he would be enabled to dart his iron before theycould completely overtake and pass him. as for derick, he seemed quiteconfident that this would be the case, and occasionally with a deridinggesture shook his lamp-feeder at the other boats."the ungracious and ungrateful dog!" cried starbuck; "he mocksand dares me with the very poor-box i filled for him not five minutesago!"_then in his old intense whisper_"give way, greyhounds! dogto it!""i tell ye what it is, men"_cried stubb to his crew_"it'sagainst my religion to get mad; but i'd like to eat that villainousyarman_pull_won't ye? are ye going to let that rascal beat ye? doye love brandy? a hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man. come, whydon't some of ye burst a blood-vessel? who's that been dropping ananchor overboard_we don't budge an inch_we're becalmed. halloo,here's grass growing in the boat's bottom_and by the lord, themast there's budding. this won't do, boys. look at that yarman! theshort and long of it is, men, will ye spit fire or not?""oh! see the suds he makes!" cried flask, dancing up anddown_"what a hump_oh, do pile on the beef_lays like a log! oh!my lads, do spring_slap-jacks and quahogs for supper, you know, mylads_baked clams and muffins_oh, do, do, spring,_he's a hundredbarreller_don't lose him now_don't oh, don't!_see thatyarman_oh, won't ye pull for your duff, my lads_such a sog! sucha sogger! don't ye love sperm? there goes three thousand dollars,men!_a bank!_a whole bank! the bank of england!_oh, do, do,do!_what's that yarman about now?"at this moment derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder at theadvancing boats, and also his oil-can; perhaps with the double viewof retarding his rivals' way, and at the same time economicallyaccelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss."the unmannerly dutch dogger!" cried stubb. "pull now, men, likefifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils.what d'ye say, tashtego; are you the man to snap your spine intwo-and-twenty pieces for the honour of old gayhead? what d'ye say?""i say, pull like god-dam,"_cried the indian.fiercely, but evenly incited by the taunts of the german, the pequod'sthree boats now began ranging almost abreast; and, so disposed,momentarily neared him. in that fine, loose, chivalrous attitude ofthe headsman when drawing near to his prey, the three mates stood upproudly, occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating cryof, "there she slides, now! hurrah for the white-ash breeze! down withthe yarman! sail over him!"but so decided an original start had derick had, that spite of alltheir gallantry, he would have proved the victor in this race, had nota righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught the bladeof his midship oarsman. while this clumsy lubber was striving to freehis white-ash, and while, in consequence, derick's boat was nigh tocapsizing, and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage;_thatwas a good time for starbuck, stubb, and flask. with a shout, they tooka mortal start forwards, and slantingly ranged up on the german'squarter. an instant more, and all four boats were diagonically in thewhale's immediate wake, while stretching from them, on both sides, wasthe foaming swell that he made.it was a terrific, most pitiable, and maddening sight. the whale wasnow going head out, and sending his spout before him in a continualtormented jet; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony offright. now to this hand, now to that, he yawed in his faltering flight,and still at every billow that he broke, he spasmodically sank in thesea, or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating fin. so have iseen a bird with clipped wing making affrighted broken circles in theair, vainly striving to escape the piratical hawks. but the bird has avoice, and with plaintive cries will make known her fear; but the fearof this vast dumb brute of the sea, was chained up and enchanted in him;he had no voice, save that choking respiration through his spiracle,and this made the sight of him unspeakably pitiable; while still, in hisamazing bulk, portcullis jaw, and omnipotent tail, there was enough toappal the stoutest man who so pitied.seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the pequod'sboats the advantage, and rather than be thus foiled of his game, derickchose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually long dart,ere the last chance would for ever escape.but no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke, than all threetigers_queequeg, tashtego, daggoo_instinctively sprang to theirfeet, and standing in a diagonal row, simultaneously pointed theirbarbs; and darted over the head of the german harpooneer, theirthree nantucket irons entered the whale. blinding vapours of foam andwhite-fire! the three boats, in the first fury of the whale's headlongrush, bumped the german's aside with such force, that both derick andhis baffled harpooneer were spilled out, and sailed over by the threeflying keels."don't be afraid, my butter-boxes," cried stubb, casting a passingglance upon them as he shot by; "ye'll be picked up presently_allright_i saw some sharks astern_st. bernard's dogs, youknow_relieve distressed travellers. hurrah! this is the way to sailnow. every keel a sunbeam! hurrah!_here we go like three tin kettlesat the tail of a mad cougar! this puts me in mind of fastening to anelephant in a tilbury on a plain_makes the wheel-spokes fly, boys,when you fasten to him that way; and there's danger of being pitchedout too, when you strike a hill. hurrah! this is the way a fellow feelswhen he's going to davy jones_all a rush down an endless inclinedplane! hurrah! this whale carries the everlasting mail!"but the monster's run was a brief one. giving a sudden gasp, hetumultuously sounded. with a grating rush, the three lines flew roundthe loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in them;while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid sounding wouldsoon exhaust the lines, that using all their dexterous might, theycaught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on; till atlast_owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined chocks ofthe boats, whence the three ropes went straight down into the blue_thegunwales of the bows were almost even with the water, while the threesterns tilted high in the air. and the whale soon ceasing to sound,for some time they remained in that attitude, fearful of expending moreline, though the position was a little ticklish. but though boats havebeen taken down and lost in this way, yet it is this "holding on,"as it is called; this hooking up by the sharp barbs of his live fleshfrom the back; this it is that often torments the leviathan into soonrising again to meet the sharp lance of his foes. yet not to speakof the peril of the thing, it is to be doubted whether this course isalways the best; for it is but reasonable to presume, that the longerthe stricken whale stays under water, the more he is exhausted. because,owing to the enormous surface of him_in a full grown sperm whalesomething less than 2000 square feet_the pressure of the water isimmense. we all know what an astonishing atmospheric weight we ourselvesstand up under; even here, above-ground, in the air; how vast, then, theburden of a whale, bearing on his back a column of two hundred fathomsof ocean! it must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres. onewhaleman has estimated it at the weight of twenty line-of-battle ships,with all their guns, and stores, and men on board.as the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea, gazing downinto its eternal blue noon; and as not a single groan or cry of anysort, nay, not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its depths;what landsman would have thought, that beneath all that silence andplacidity, the utmost monster of the seas was writhing and wrenching inagony! not eight inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows.seems it credible that by three such thin threads the great leviathanwas suspended like the big weight to an eight day clock. suspended? andto what? to three bits of board. is this the creature of whom it wasonce so triumphantly said_"canst thou fill his skin with barbedirons? or his head with fish-spears? the sword of him that layeth at himcannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon: he esteemeth ironas straw; the arrow cannot make him flee; darts are counted as stubble;he laugheth at the shaking of a spear!" this the creature? this he?oh! that unfulfilments should follow the prophets. for with the strengthof a thousand thighs in his tail, leviathan had run his head under themountains of the sea, to hide him from the pequod's fish-spears!in that sloping afternoon sunlight, the shadows that the three boatssent down beneath the surface, must have been long enough and broadenough to shade half xerxes' army. who can tell how appalling to thewounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over his head!"stand by, men; he stirs," cried starbuck, as the three linessuddenly vibrated in the water, distinctly conducting upwards to them,as by magnetic wires, the life and death throbs of the whale, so thatevery oarsman felt them in his seat. the next moment, relieved in greatpart from the downward strain at the bows, the boats gave a suddenbounce upwards, as a small icefield will, when a dense herd of whitebears are scared from it into the sea."haul in! haul in!" cried starbuck again; "he's rising."the lines, of which, hardly an instant before, not one hand's breadthcould have been gained, were now in long quick coils flung back alldripping into the boats, and soon the whale broke water within twoship's lengths of the hunters.his motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion. in most land animalsthere are certain valves or flood-gates in many of their veins, wherebywhen wounded, the blood is in some degree at least instantly shut off incertain directions. not so with the whale; one of whose peculiaritiesit is to have an entire non-valvular structure of the blood-vessels, sothat when pierced even by so small a point as a harpoon, a deadlydrain is at once begun upon his whole arterial system; and when this isheightened by the extraordinary pressure of water at a great distancebelow the surface, his life may be said to pour from him in incessantstreams. yet so vast is the quantity of blood in him, and so distantand numerous its interior fountains, that he will keep thus bleeding andbleeding for a considerable period; even as in a drought a river willflow, whose source is in the well-springs of far-off and undiscerniblehills. even now, when the boats pulled upon this whale, and perilouslydrew over his swaying flukes, and the lances were darted into him,they were followed by steady jets from the new made wound, which keptcontinually playing, while the natural spout-hole in his head was onlyat intervals, however rapid, sending its affrighted moisture into theair. from this last vent no blood yet came, because no vital part of himhad thus far been struck. his life, as they significantly call it, wasuntouched.as the boats now more closely surrounded him, the whole upper part ofhis form, with much of it that is ordinarily submerged, was plainlyrevealed. his eyes, or rather the places where his eyes had been, werebeheld. as strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes of thenoblest oaks when prostrate, so from the points which the whale's eyeshad once occupied, now protruded blind bulbs, horribly pitiable to see.but pity there was none. for all his old age, and his one arm, and hisblind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered, in order to light thegay bridals and other merry-makings of men, and also to illuminate thesolemn churches that preach unconditional inoffensiveness by all to all.still rolling in his blood, at last he partially disclosed a strangelydiscoloured bunch or protuberance, the size of a bushel, low down on theflank."a nice spot," cried flask; "just let me prick him there once.""avast!" cried starbuck, "there's no need of that!"but humane starbuck was too late. at the instant of the dart anulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound, and goaded by it into more thansufferable anguish, the whale now spouting thick blood, with swift furyblindly darted at the craft, bespattering them and their glorying crewsall over with showers of gore, capsizing flask's boat and marring thebows. it was his death stroke. for, by this time, so spent was he byloss of blood, that he helplessly rolled away from the wreck he hadmade; lay panting on his side, impotently flapped with his stumped fin,then over and over slowly revolved like a waning world; turned upthe white secrets of his belly; lay like a log, and died. it was mostpiteous, that last expiring spout. as when by unseen hands the wateris gradually drawn off from some mighty fountain, and with half-stifledmelancholy gurglings the spray-column lowers and lowers to theground_so the last long dying spout of the whale.soon, while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship, the bodyshowed symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled. immediately,by starbuck's orders, lines were secured to it at different points, sothat ere long every boat was a buoy; the sunken whale being suspended afew inches beneath them by the cords. by very heedful management, whenthe ship drew nigh, the whale was transferred to her side, and wasstrongly secured there by the stiffest fluke-chains, for it was plainthat unless artificially upheld, the body would at once sink to thebottom.it so chanced that almost upon first cutting into him with the spade,the entire length of a corroded harpoon was found imbedded in his flesh,on the lower part of the bunch before described. but as the stumps ofharpoons are frequently found in the dead bodies of captured whales,with the flesh perfectly healed around them, and no prominence of anykind to denote their place; therefore, there must needs have beensome other unknown reason in the present case fully to account forthe ulceration alluded to. but still more curious was the fact of alance-head of stone being found in him, not far from the buried iron,the flesh perfectly firm about it. who had darted that stone lance? andwhen? it might have been darted by some nor' west indian long beforeamerica was discovered.what other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrouscabinet there is no telling. but a sudden stop was put to furtherdiscoveries, by the ship's being unprecedentedly dragged over sidewaysto the sea, owing to the body's immensely increasing tendency to sink.however, starbuck, who had the ordering of affairs, hung on to it to thelast; hung on to it so resolutely, indeed, that when at length the shipwould have been capsized, if still persisting in locking arms with thebody; then, when the command was given to break clear from it, such wasthe immovable strain upon the timber-heads to which the fluke-chains andcables were fastened, that it was impossible to cast them off. meantimeeverything in the pequod was aslant. to cross to the other side of thedeck was like walking up the steep gabled roof of a house. the shipgroaned and gasped. many of the ivory inlayings of her bulwarks andcabins were started from their places, by the unnatural dislocation.in vain handspikes and crows were brought to bear upon the immovablefluke-chains, to pry them adrift from the timberheads; and so lowhad the whale now settled that the submerged ends could not be at allapproached, while every moment whole tons of ponderosity seemed added tothe sinking bulk, and the ship seemed on the point of going over."hold on, hold on, won't ye?" cried stubb to the body, "don'tbe in such a devil of a hurry to sink! by thunder, men, we must dosomething or go for it. no use prying there; avast, i say with yourhandspikes, and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife, and cutthe big chains.""knife? aye, aye," cried queequeg, and seizing the carpenter'sheavy hatchet, he leaned out of a porthole, and steel to iron, beganslashing at the largest fluke-chains. but a few strokes, full of sparks,were given, when the exceeding strain effected the rest. with a terrificsnap, every fastening went adrift; the ship righted, the carcase sank.now, this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed spermwhale is a very curious thing; nor has any fisherman yet adequatelyaccounted for it. usually the dead sperm whale floats with greatbuoyancy, with its side or belly considerably elevated above thesurface. if the only whales that thus sank were old, meagre, andbroken-hearted creatures, their pads of lard diminished and all theirbones heavy and rheumatic; then you might with some reason assert thatthis sinking is caused by an uncommon specific gravity in the fish sosinking, consequent upon this absence of buoyant matter in him. but itis not so. for young whales, in the highest health, and swelling withnoble aspirations, prematurely cut off in the warm flush and may oflife, with all their panting lard about them; even these brawny, buoyantheroes do sometimes sink.be it said, however, that the sperm whale is far less liable to thisaccident than any other species. where one of that sort go down, twentyright whales do. this difference in the species is no doubt imputable inno small degree to the greater quantity of bone in the right whale;his venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more than a ton; from thisincumbrance the sperm whale is wholly free. but there are instanceswhere, after the lapse of many hours or several days, the sunken whaleagain rises, more buoyant than in life. but the reason of thisis obvious. gases are generated in him; he swells to a prodigiousmagnitude; becomes a sort of animal balloon. a line-of-battle ship couldhardly keep him under then. in the shore whaling, on soundings, amongthe bays of new zealand, when a right whale gives token of sinking, theyfasten buoys to him, with plenty of rope; so that when the body has gonedown, they know where to look for it when it shall have ascended again.it was not long after the sinking of the body that a cry was heardfrom the pequod's mast-heads, announcing that the jungfrau wasagain lowering her boats; though the only spout in sight was that of afin-back, belonging to the species of uncapturable whales, because ofits incredible power of swimming. nevertheless, the fin-back's spoutis so similar to the sperm whale's, that by unskilful fishermen it isoften mistaken for it. and consequently derick and all his host were nowin valiant chase of this unnearable brute. the virgin crowding all sail,made after her four young keels, and thus they all disappeared far toleeward, still in bold, hopeful chase.oh! many are the fin-backs, and many are the dericks, my friend.chapter 82. the honour and glory of whaling.there are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is the truemethod.the more i dive into this matter of whaling, and push my researches upto the very spring-head of it so much the more am i impressed with itsgreat honourableness and antiquity; and especially when i find so manygreat demi-gods and heroes, prophets of all sorts, who one way or otherhave shed distinction upon it, i am transported with the reflectionthat i myself belong, though but subordinately, to so emblazoned afraternity.the gallant perseus, a son of jupiter, was the first whaleman; andto the eternal honour of our calling be it said, that the first whaleattacked by our brotherhood was not killed with any sordid intent. thosewere the knightly days of our profession, when we only bore arms tosuccor the distressed, and not to fill men's lamp-feeders. every oneknows the fine story of perseus and andromeda; how the lovely andromeda,the daughter of a king, was tied to a rock on the sea-coast, and asleviathan was in the very act of carrying her off, perseus, the princeof whalemen, intrepidly advancing, harpooned the monster, and deliveredand married the maid. it was an admirable artistic exploit, rarelyachieved by the best harpooneers of the present day; inasmuch as thisleviathan was slain at the very first dart. and let no man doubt thisarkite story; for in the ancient joppa, now jaffa, on the syrian coast,in one of the pagan temples, there stood for many ages the vast skeletonof a whale, which the city's legends and all the inhabitants assertedto be the identical bones of the monster that perseus slew. when theromans took joppa, the same skeleton was carried to italy in triumph.what seems most singular and suggestively important in this story, isthis: it was from joppa that jonah set sail.akin to the adventure of perseus and andromeda_indeed, by somesupposed to be indirectly derived from it_is that famous story of st.george and the dragon; which dragon i maintain to have been a whale;for in many old chronicles whales and dragons are strangely jumbledtogether, and often stand for each other. "thou art as a lion of thewaters, and as a dragon of the sea," saith ezekiel; hereby, plainlymeaning a whale; in truth, some versions of the bible use that worditself. besides, it would much subtract from the glory of the exploithad st. george but encountered a crawling reptile of the land, insteadof doing battle with the great monster of the deep. any man may killa snake, but only a perseus, a st. george, a coffin, have the heart inthem to march boldly up to a whale.let not the modern paintings of this scene mislead us; for thoughthe creature encountered by that valiant whaleman of old is vaguelyrepresented of a griffin-like shape, and though the battle is depictedon land and the saint on horseback, yet considering the great ignoranceof those times, when the true form of the whale was unknown to artists;and considering that as in perseus' case, st. george's whale mighthave crawled up out of the sea on the beach; and considering thatthe animal ridden by st. george might have been only a large seal,or sea-horse; bearing all this in mind, it will not appear altogetherincompatible with the sacred legend and the ancientest draughts of thescene, to hold this so-called dragon no other than the great leviathanhimself. in fact, placed before the strict and piercing truth, thiswhole story will fare like that fish, flesh, and fowl idol of thephilistines, dagon by name; who being planted before the ark of israel,his horse's head and both the palms of his hands fell off from him,and only the stump or fishy part of him remained. thus, then, one of ourown noble stamp, even a whaleman, is the tutelary guardian of england;and by good rights, we harpooneers of nantucket should be enrolled inthe most noble order of st. george. and therefore, let not the knightsof that honourable company (none of whom, i venture to say, have everhad to do with a whale like their great patron), let them never eye anantucketer with disdain, since even in our woollen frocks and tarredtrowsers we are much better entitled to st. george's decoration thanthey.whether to admit hercules among us or not, concerning this i longremained dubious: for though according to the greek mythologies, thatantique crockett and kit carson_that brawny doer of rejoicing gooddeeds, was swallowed down and thrown up by a whale; still, whetherthat strictly makes a whaleman of him, that might be mooted. it nowhereappears that he ever actually harpooned his fish, unless, indeed,from the inside. nevertheless, he may be deemed a sort of involuntarywhaleman; at any rate the whale caught him, if he did not the whale. iclaim him for one of our clan.but, by the best contradictory authorities, this grecian story ofhercules and the whale is considered to be derived from the still moreancient hebrew story of jonah and the whale; and vice versa; certainlythey are very similar. if i claim the demigod then, why not the prophet?nor do heroes, saints, demigods, and prophets alone comprise the wholeroll of our order. our grand master is still to be named; for like royalkings of old times, we find the head waters of our fraternity in nothingshort of the great gods themselves. that wondrous oriental story is nowto be rehearsed from the shaster, which gives us the dread vishnoo, oneof the three persons in the godhead of the hindoos; gives us this divinevishnoo himself for our lord;_vishnoo, who, by the first of his tenearthly incarnations, has for ever set apart and sanctified the whale.when brahma, or the god of gods, saith the shaster, resolved to recreatethe world after one of its periodical dissolutions, he gave birth tovishnoo, to preside over the work; but the vedas, or mystical books,whose perusal would seem to have been indispensable to vishnoo beforebeginning the creation, and which therefore must have containedsomething in the shape of practical hints to young architects, thesevedas were lying at the bottom of the waters; so vishnoo becameincarnate in a whale, and sounding down in him to the uttermost depths,rescued the sacred volumes. was not this vishnoo a whaleman, then? evenas a man who rides a horse is called a horseman?perseus, st. george, hercules, jonah, and vishnoo! there's amember-roll for you! what club but the whaleman's can head off likethat?chapter 83. jonah historically regarded.reference was made to the historical story of jonah and the whale in thepreceding chapter. now some nantucketers rather distrust this historicalstory of jonah and the whale. but then there were some sceptical greeksand romans, who, standing out from the orthodox pagans of their times,equally doubted the story of hercules and the whale, and arion and thedolphin; and yet their doubting those traditions did not make thosetraditions one whit the less facts, for all that.one old sag-harbor whaleman's chief reason for questioning the hebrewstory was this:_he had one of those quaint old-fashioned bibles,embellished with curious, unscientific plates; one of which representedjonah's whale with two spouts in his head_a peculiarity only truewith respect to a species of the leviathan (the right whale, and thevarieties of that order), concerning which the fishermen have thissaying, "a penny roll would choke him"; his swallow is so verysmall. but, to this, bishop jebb's anticipative answer is ready. it isnot necessary, hints the bishop, that we consider jonah as tombed in thewhale's belly, but as temporarily lodged in some part of his mouth.and this seems reasonable enough in the good bishop. for truly, theright whale's mouth would accommodate a couple of whist-tables,and comfortably seat all the players. possibly, too, jonah might haveensconced himself in a hollow tooth; but, on second thoughts, the rightwhale is toothless.another reason which sag-harbor (he went by that name) urged for hiswant of faith in this matter of the prophet, was something obscurely inreference to his incarcerated body and the whale's gastric juices. butthis objection likewise falls to the ground, because a german exegetistsupposes that jonah must have taken refuge in the floating body of adead whale_even as the french soldiers in the russian campaign turnedtheir dead horses into tents, and crawled into them. besides, it hasbeen divined by other continental commentators, that when jonah wasthrown overboard from the joppa ship, he straightway effected his escapeto another vessel near by, some vessel with a whale for a figure-head;and, i would add, possibly called "the whale," as some craft arenowadays christened the "shark," the "gull," the "eagle."nor have there been wanting learned exegetists who have opined that thewhale mentioned in the book of jonah merely meant a life-preserver_aninflated bag of wind_which the endangered prophet swam to, and so wassaved from a watery doom. poor sag-harbor, therefore, seems worsted allround. but he had still another reason for his want of faith. it wasthis, if i remember right: jonah was swallowed by the whale in themediterranean sea, and after three days he was vomited up somewherewithin three days' journey of nineveh, a city on the tigris, very muchmore than three days' journey across from the nearest point of themediterranean coast. how is that?but was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet within thatshort distance of nineveh? yes. he might have carried him round by theway of the cape of good hope. but not to speak of the passage throughthe whole length of the mediterranean, and another passage up thepersian gulf and red sea, such a supposition would involve the completecircumnavigation of all africa in three days, not to speak of the tigriswaters, near the site of nineveh, being too shallow for any whale toswim in. besides, this idea of jonah's weathering the cape of goodhope at so early a day would wrest the honour of the discovery of thatgreat headland from bartholomew diaz, its reputed discoverer, and somake modern history a liar.but all these foolish arguments of old sag-harbor only evinced hisfoolish pride of reason_a thing still more reprehensible in him,seeing that he had but little learning except what he had picked up fromthe sun and the sea. i say it only shows his foolish, impious pride,and abominable, devilish rebellion against the reverend clergy. for by aportuguese catholic priest, this very idea of jonah's going to ninevehvia the cape of good hope was advanced as a signal magnification ofthe general miracle. and so it was. besides, to this day, the highlyenlightened turks devoutly believe in the historical story of jonah.and some three centuries ago, an english traveller in old harris'svoyages, speaks of a turkish mosque built in honour of jonah, in whichmosque was a miraculous lamp that burnt without any oil.chapter 84. pitchpoling.to make them run easily and swiftly, the axles of carriages areanointed; and for much the same purpose, some whalers perform ananalogous operation upon their boat; they grease the bottom. nor is itto be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm, it may possiblybe of no contemptible advantage; considering that oil and water arehostile; that oil is a sliding thing, and that the object in view is tomake the boat slide bravely. queequeg believed strongly in anointinghis boat, and one morning not long after the german ship jungfraudisappeared, took more than customary pains in that occupation; crawlingunder its bottom, where it hung over the side, and rubbing in theunctuousness as though diligently seeking to insure a crop of hair fromthe craft's bald keel. he seemed to be working in obedience to someparticular presentiment. nor did it remain unwarranted by the event.towards noon whales were raised; but so soon as the ship sailed down tothem, they turned and fled with swift precipitancy; a disordered flight,as of cleopatra's barges from actium.nevertheless, the boats pursued, and stubb's was foremost. by greatexertion, tashtego at last succeeded in planting one iron; but thestricken whale, without at all sounding, still continued his horizontalflight, with added fleetness. such unintermitted strainings upon theplanted iron must sooner or later inevitably extract it. it becameimperative to lance the flying whale, or be content to lose him. butto haul the boat up to his flank was impossible, he swam so fast andfurious. what then remained?of all the wondrous devices and dexterities, the sleights of hand andcountless subtleties, to which the veteran whaleman is so often forced,none exceed that fine manoeuvre with the lance called pitchpoling. smallsword, or broad sword, in all its exercises boasts nothing like it. itis only indispensable with an inveterate running whale; its grandfact and feature is the wonderful distance to which the long lance isaccurately darted from a violently rocking, jerking boat, under extremeheadway. steel and wood included, the entire spear is some ten or twelvefeet in length; the staff is much slighter than that of the harpoon,and also of a lighter material_pine. it is furnished with a small ropecalled a warp, of considerable length, by which it can be hauled back tothe hand after darting.but before going further, it is important to mention here, that thoughthe harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the lance, yet itis seldom done; and when done, is still less frequently successful,on account of the greater weight and inferior length of the harpoon ascompared with the lance, which in effect become serious drawbacks. as ageneral thing, therefore, you must first get fast to a whale, before anypitchpoling comes into play.look now at stubb; a man who from his humorous, deliberate coolness andequanimity in the direst emergencies, was specially qualified to excelin pitchpoling. look at him; he stands upright in the tossed bow of theflying boat; wrapt in fleecy foam, the towing whale is forty feet ahead.handling the long lance lightly, glancing twice or thrice along itslength to see if it be exactly straight, stubb whistlingly gathers upthe coil of the warp in one hand, so as to secure its free end in hisgrasp, leaving the rest unobstructed. then holding the lance full beforehis waistband's middle, he levels it at the whale; when, coveringhim with it, he steadily depresses the butt-end in his hand, therebyelevating the point till the weapon stands fairly balanced upon hispalm, fifteen feet in the air. he minds you somewhat of a juggler,balancing a long staff on his chin. next moment with a rapid, namelessimpulse, in a superb lofty arch the bright steel spans the foamingdistance, and quivers in the life spot of the whale. instead ofsparkling water, he now spouts red blood."that drove the spigot out of him!" cried stubb. "_tis july'simmortal fourth; all fountains must run wine today! would now, it wereold orleans whiskey, or old ohio, or unspeakable old monongahela! then,tashtego, lad, i'd have ye hold a canakin to the jet, and we'd drinkround it! yea, verily, hearts alive, we'd brew choice punch in thespread of his spout-hole there, and from that live punch-bowl quaff theliving stuff."again and again to such gamesome talk, the dexterous dart is repeated,the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held in skilfulleash. the agonized whale goes into his flurry; the tow-line isslackened, and the pitchpoler dropping astern, folds his hands, andmutely watches the monster die.chapter 85. the fountain.that for six thousand years_and no one knows how many millions of agesbefore_the great whales should have been spouting all over the sea,and sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the deep, as with somany sprinkling or mistifying pots; and that for some centuries back,thousands of hunters should have been close by the fountain of thewhale, watching these sprinklings and spoutings_that all this shouldbe, and yet, that down to this blessed minute (fifteen and a quarterminutes past one o'clock p.m. of this sixteenth day of december, a.d.1851), it should still remain a problem, whether these spoutings are,after all, really water, or nothing but vapour_this is surely anoteworthy thing.let us, then, look at this matter, along with some interesting itemscontingent. every one knows that by the peculiar cunning of theirgills, the finny tribes in general breathe the air which at all times iscombined with the element in which they swim; hence, a herring or a codmight live a century, and never once raise its head above the surface.but owing to his marked internal structure which gives him regularlungs, like a human being's, the whale can only live by inhaling thedisengaged air in the open atmosphere. wherefore the necessity forhis periodical visits to the upper world. but he cannot in any degreebreathe through his mouth, for, in his ordinary attitude, the spermwhale's mouth is buried at least eight feet beneath the surface; andwhat is still more, his windpipe has no connexion with his mouth. no, hebreathes through his spiracle alone; and this is on the top of his head.if i say, that in any creature breathing is only a functionindispensable to vitality, inasmuch as it withdraws from the air acertain element, which being subsequently brought into contact with theblood imparts to the blood its vivifying principle, i do not think ishall err; though i may possibly use some superfluous scientific words.assume it, and it follows that if all the blood in a man could beaerated with one breath, he might then seal up his nostrils and notfetch another for a considerable time. that is to say, he would thenlive without breathing. anomalous as it may seem, this is precisely thecase with the whale, who systematically lives, by intervals, his fullhour and more (when at the bottom) without drawing a single breath, orso much as in any way inhaling a particle of air; for, remember, he hasno gills. how is this? between his ribs and on each side of his spinehe is supplied with a remarkable involved cretan labyrinth ofvermicelli-like vessels, which vessels, when he quits the surface, arecompletely distended with oxygenated blood. so that for an hour or more,a thousand fathoms in the sea, he carries a surplus stock of vitality inhim, just as the camel crossing the waterless desert carries a surplussupply of drink for future use in its four supplementary stomachs.the anatomical fact of this labyrinth is indisputable; and that thesupposition founded upon it is reasonable and true, seems the morecogent to me, when i consider the otherwise inexplicable obstinacy ofthat leviathan in having his spoutings out, as the fishermen phraseit. this is what i mean. if unmolested, upon rising to the surface, thesperm whale will continue there for a period of time exactly uniformwith all his other unmolested risings. say he stays eleven minutes, andjets seventy times, that is, respires seventy breaths; then whenever herises again, he will be sure to have his seventy breaths over again, toa minute. now, if after he fetches a few breaths you alarm him, so thathe sounds, he will be always dodging up again to make good his regularallowance of air. and not till those seventy breaths are told, will hefinally go down to stay out his full term below. remark, however, thatin different individuals these rates are different; but in any onethey are alike. now, why should the whale thus insist upon having hisspoutings out, unless it be to replenish his reservoir of air, eredescending for good? how obvious is it, too, that this necessity for thewhale's rising exposes him to all the fatal hazards of the chase. fornot by hook or by net could this vast leviathan be caught, when sailinga thousand fathoms beneath the sunlight. not so much thy skill, then, ohunter, as the great necessities that strike the victory to thee!in man, breathing is incessantly going on_one breath only servingfor two or three pulsations; so that whatever other business he has toattend to, waking or sleeping, breathe he must, or die he will. but thesperm whale only breathes about one seventh or sunday of his time.it has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole; ifit could truthfully be added that his spouts are mixed with water, theni opine we should be furnished with the reason why his sense of smellseems obliterated in him; for the only thing about him that at allanswers to his nose is that identical spout-hole; and being so cloggedwith two elements, it could not be expected to have the power ofsmelling. but owing to the mystery of the spout_whether it be water orwhether it be vapour_no absolute certainty can as yet be arrived at onthis head. sure it is, nevertheless, that the sperm whale has no properolfactories. but what does he want of them? no roses, no violets, nocologne-water in the sea.furthermore, as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of his spoutingcanal, and as that long canal_like the grand erie canal_is furnishedwith a sort of locks (that open and shut) for the downward retention ofair or the upward exclusion of water, therefore the whale has no voice;unless you insult him by saying, that when he so strangely rumbles,he talks through his nose. but then again, what has the whale to say?seldom have i known any profound being that had anything to say tothis world, unless forced to stammer out something by way of getting aliving. oh! happy that the world is such an excellent listener!now, the spouting canal of the sperm whale, chiefly intended as itis for the conveyance of air, and for several feet laid along,horizontally, just beneath the upper surface of his head, and a littleto one side; this curious canal is very much like a gas-pipe laid downin a city on one side of a street. but the question returns whether thisgas-pipe is also a water-pipe; in other words, whether the spout of thesperm whale is the mere vapour of the exhaled breath, or whether thatexhaled breath is mixed with water taken in at the mouth, anddischarged through the spiracle. it is certain that the mouth indirectlycommunicates with the spouting canal; but it cannot be proved that thisis for the purpose of discharging water through the spiracle. becausethe greatest necessity for so doing would seem to be, when in feeding heaccidentally takes in water. but the sperm whale's food is far beneaththe surface, and there he cannot spout even if he would. besides, ifyou regard him very closely, and time him with your watch, you will findthat when unmolested, there is an undeviating rhyme between the periodsof his jets and the ordinary periods of respiration.but why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject? speak out!you have seen him spout; then declare what the spout is; can you nottell water from air? my dear sir, in this world it is not so easy tosettle these plain things. i have ever found your plain things theknottiest of all. and as for this whale spout, you might almost stand init, and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely.the central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mist envelopingit; and how can you certainly tell whether any water falls from it,when, always, when you are close enough to a whale to get a close viewof his spout, he is in a prodigious commotion, the water cascadingall around him. and if at such times you should think that you reallyperceived drops of moisture in the spout, how do you know that they arenot merely condensed from its vapour; or how do you know that theyare not those identical drops superficially lodged in the spout-holefissure, which is countersunk into the summit of the whale's head? foreven when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day sea in a calm, withhis elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary's in the desert; even then,the whale always carries a small basin of water on his head, as undera blazing sun you will sometimes see a cavity in a rock filled up withrain.nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touching theprecise nature of the whale spout. it will not do for him to be peeringinto it, and putting his face in it. you cannot go with your pitcher tothis fountain and fill it, and bring it away. for even when coming intoslight contact with the outer, vapoury shreds of the jet, which willoften happen, your skin will feverishly smart, from the acridness ofthe thing so touching it. and i know one, who coming into still closercontact with the spout, whether with some scientific object in view,or otherwise, i cannot say, the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm.wherefore, among whalemen, the spout is deemed poisonous; they try toevade it. another thing; i have heard it said, and i do not much doubtit, that if the jet is fairly spouted into your eyes, it will blind you.the wisest thing the investigator can do then, it seems to me, is to letthis deadly spout alone.still, we can hypothesize, even if we cannot prove and establish. myhypothesis is this: that the spout is nothing but mist. and besidesother reasons, to this conclusion i am impelled, by considerationstouching the great inherent dignity and sublimity of the sperm whale;i account him no common, shallow being, inasmuch as it is an undisputedfact that he is never found on soundings, or near shores; all otherwhales sometimes are. he is both ponderous and profound. and i amconvinced that from the heads of all ponderous profound beings, such asplato, pyrrho, the devil, jupiter, dante, and so on, there always goesup a certain semi-visible steam, while in the act of thinking deepthoughts. while composing a little treatise on eternity, i had thecuriosity to place a mirror before me; and ere long saw reflected there,a curious involved worming and undulation in the atmosphere over myhead. the invariable moisture of my hair, while plunged in deep thought,after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled attic, of an august noon;this seems an additional argument for the above supposition.and how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty, misty monster, tobehold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea; his vast, mildhead overhung by a canopy of vapour, engendered by his incommunicablecontemplations, and that vapour_as you will sometimes seeit_glorified by a rainbow, as if heaven itself had put its seal uponhis thoughts. for, d'ye see, rainbows do not visit the clear air; theyonly irradiate vapour. and so, through all the thick mists of the dimdoubts in my mind, divine intuitions now and then shoot, enkindling myfog with a heavenly ray. and for this i thank god; for all have doubts;many deny; but doubts or denials, few along with them, have intuitions.doubts of all things earthly, and intuitions of some things heavenly;this combination makes neither believer nor infidel, but makes a man whoregards them both with equal eye.chapter 86. the tail.other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope,and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; less celestial, icelebrate a tail.reckoning the largest sized sperm whale's tail to begin at that pointof the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man, it comprisesupon its upper surface alone, an area of at least fifty square feet. thecompact round body of its root expands into two broad, firm, flat palmsor flukes, gradually shoaling away to less than an inch in thickness.at the crotch or junction, these flukes slightly overlap, then sidewaysrecede from each other like wings, leaving a wide vacancy between. inno living thing are the lines of beauty more exquisitely defined than inthe crescentic borders of these flukes. at its utmost expansion in thefull grown whale, the tail will considerably exceed twenty feet across.the entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews; but cutinto it, and you find that three distinct strata compose it:_upper,middle, and lower. the fibres in the upper and lower layers, arelong and horizontal; those of the middle one, very short, and runningcrosswise between the outside layers. this triune structure, as much asanything else, imparts power to the tail. to the student of old romanwalls, the middle layer will furnish a curious parallel to the thincourse of tiles always alternating with the stone in those wonderfulrelics of the antique, and which undoubtedly contribute so much to thegreat strength of the masonry.but as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not enough,the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and woof ofmuscular fibres and filaments, which passing on either side the loinsand running down into the flukes, insensibly blend with them, andlargely contribute to their might; so that in the tail the confluentmeasureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated to a point.could annihilation occur to matter, this were the thing to do it.nor does this_its amazing strength, at all tend to cripple thegraceful flexion of its motions; where infantileness of ease undulatesthrough a titanism of power. on the contrary, those motions derive theirmost appalling beauty from it. real strength never impairs beautyor harmony, but it often bestows it; and in everything imposinglybeautiful, strength has much to do with the magic. take away the tiedtendons that all over seem bursting from the marble in the carvedhercules, and its charm would be gone. as devout eckerman lifted thelinen sheet from the naked corpse of goethe, he was overwhelmed with themassive chest of the man, that seemed as a roman triumphal arch. whenangelo paints even god the father in human form, mark what robustness isthere. and whatever they may reveal of the divine love in the son, thesoft, curled, hermaphroditical italian pictures, in which his idea hasbeen most successfully embodied; these pictures, so destitute as theyare of all brawniness, hint nothing of any power, but the mere negative,feminine one of submission and endurance, which on all hands it isconceded, form the peculiar practical virtues of his teachings.such is the subtle elasticity of the organ i treat of, that whetherwielded in sport, or in earnest, or in anger, whatever be the mood itbe in, its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace. therein nofairy's arm can transcend it.five great motions are peculiar to it. first, when used as a fin forprogression; second, when used as a mace in battle; third, in sweeping;fourth, in lobtailing; fifth, in peaking flukes.first: being horizontal in its position, the leviathan's tail acts ina different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures. it neverwriggles. in man or fish, wriggling is a sign of inferiority. to thewhale, his tail is the sole means of propulsion. scroll-wise coiledforwards beneath the body, and then rapidly sprung backwards, it is thiswhich gives that singular darting, leaping motion to the monster whenfuriously swimming. his side-fins only serve to steer by.second: it is a little significant, that while one sperm whale onlyfights another sperm whale with his head and jaw, nevertheless, in hisconflicts with man, he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail. instriking at a boat, he swiftly curves away his flukes from it, and theblow is only inflicted by the recoil. if it be made in the unobstructedair, especially if it descend to its mark, the stroke is then simplyirresistible. no ribs of man or boat can withstand it. your onlysalvation lies in eluding it; but if it comes sideways through theopposing water, then partly owing to the light buoyancy of the whaleboat, and the elasticity of its materials, a cracked rib or a dashedplank or two, a sort of stitch in the side, is generally the mostserious result. these submerged side blows are so often received in thefishery, that they are accounted mere child's play. some one stripsoff a frock, and the hole is stopped.third: i cannot demonstrate it, but it seems to me, that in the whalethe sense of touch is concentrated in the tail; for in this respectthere is a delicacy in it only equalled by the daintiness of theelephant's trunk. this delicacy is chiefly evinced in the action ofsweeping, when in maidenly gentleness the whale with a certain softslowness moves his immense flukes from side to side upon the surface ofthe sea; and if he feel but a sailor's whisker, woe to that sailor,whiskers and all. what tenderness there is in that preliminary touch!had this tail any prehensile power, i should straightway bethink me ofdarmonodes' elephant that so frequented the flower-market, and withlow salutations presented nosegays to damsels, and then caressed theirzones. on more accounts than one, a pity it is that the whale does notpossess this prehensile virtue in his tail; for i have heard of yetanother elephant, that when wounded in the fight, curved round his trunkand extracted the dart.fourth: stealing unawares upon the whale in the fancied security of themiddle of solitary seas, you find him unbent from the vast corpulenceof his dignity, and kitten-like, he plays on the ocean as if it were ahearth. but still you see his power in his play. the broad palms ofhis tail are flirted high into the air; then smiting the surface, thethunderous concussion resounds for miles. you would almost think a greatgun had been discharged; and if you noticed the light wreath of vapourfrom the spiracle at his other extremity, you would think that that wasthe smoke from the touch-hole.fifth: as in the ordinary floating posture of the leviathan the flukeslie considerably below the level of his back, they are then completelyout of sight beneath the surface; but when he is about to plunge intothe deeps, his entire flukes with at least thirty feet of his body aretossed erect in the air, and so remain vibrating a moment, till theydownwards shoot out of view. excepting the sublime breach_somewhereelse to be described_this peaking of the whale's flukes is perhapsthe grandest sight to be seen in all animated nature. out of thebottomless profundities the gigantic tail seems spasmodically snatchingat the highest heaven. so in dreams, have i seen majestic satanthrusting forth his tormented colossal claw from the flame baltic ofhell. but in gazing at such scenes, it is all in all what mood youare in; if in the dantean, the devils will occur to you; if in that ofisaiah, the archangels. standing at the mast-head of my ship during asunrise that crimsoned sky and sea, i once saw a large herd of whalesin the east, all heading towards the sun, and for a moment vibrating inconcert with peaked flukes. as it seemed to me at the time, such a grandembodiment of adoration of the gods was never beheld, even in persia,the home of the fire worshippers. as ptolemy philopater testified ofthe african elephant, i then testified of the whale, pronouncing himthe most devout of all beings. for according to king juba, the militaryelephants of antiquity often hailed the morning with their trunksuplifted in the profoundest silence.the chance comparison in this chapter, between the whale and theelephant, so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunkof the other are concerned, should not tend to place those twoopposite organs on an equality, much less the creatures to which theyrespectively belong. for as the mightiest elephant is but a terrier toleviathan, so, compared with leviathan's tail, his trunk is but thestalk of a lily. the most direful blow from the elephant's trunk wereas the playful tap of a fan, compared with the measureless crushand crash of the sperm whale's ponderous flukes, which in repeatedinstances have one after the other hurled entire boats with all theiroars and crews into the air, very much as an indian juggler tosses hisballs.**though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whaleand the elephant is preposterous, inasmuch as in that particular theelephant stands in much the same respect to the whale that a dog does tothe elephant; nevertheless, there are not wanting some points of curioussimilitude; among these is the spout. it is well known that the elephantwill often draw up water or dust in his trunk, and then elevating it,jet it forth in a stream.the more i consider this mighty tail, the more do i deplore my inabilityto express it. at times there are gestures in it, which, though theywould well grace the hand of man, remain wholly inexplicable. in anextensive herd, so remarkable, occasionally, are these mystic gestures,that i have heard hunters who have declared them akin to free-masonsigns and symbols; that the whale, indeed, by these methodsintelligently conversed with the world. nor are there wanting othermotions of the whale in his general body, full of strangeness, andunaccountable to his most experienced assailant. dissect him how i may,then, i but go skin deep; i know him not, and never will. but if i knownot even the tail of this whale, how understand his head? much more,how comprehend his face, when face he has none? thou shalt see my backparts, my tail, he seems to say, but my face shall not be seen. but icannot completely make out his back parts; and hint what he will abouthis face, i say again he has no face.chapter 87. the grand armada.the long and narrow peninsula of malacca, extending south-eastward fromthe territories of birmah, forms the most southerly point of all asia.in a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the long islands ofsumatra, java, bally, and timor; which, with many others, form avast mole, or rampart, lengthwise connecting asia with australia,and dividing the long unbroken indian ocean from the thickly studdedoriental archipelagoes. this rampart is pierced by several sally-portsfor the convenience of ships and whales; conspicuous among which are thestraits of sunda and malacca. by the straits of sunda, chiefly, vesselsbound to china from the west, emerge into the china seas.those narrow straits of sunda divide sumatra from java; and standingmidway in that vast rampart of islands, buttressed by that bold greenpromontory, known to seamen as java head; they not a little correspondto the central gateway opening into some vast walled empire: andconsidering the inexhaustible wealth of spices, and silks, and jewels,and gold, and ivory, with which the thousand islands of that orientalsea are enriched, it seems a significant provision of nature, that suchtreasures, by the very formation of the land, should at least bear theappearance, however ineffectual, of being guarded from the all-graspingwestern world. the shores of the straits of sunda are unsuppliedwith those domineering fortresses which guard the entrances to themediterranean, the baltic, and the propontis. unlike the danes, theseorientals do not demand the obsequious homage of lowered top-sails fromthe endless procession of ships before the wind, which for centuriespast, by night and by day, have passed between the islands of sumatraand java, freighted with the costliest cargoes of the east. but whilethey freely waive a ceremonial like this, they do by no means renouncetheir claim to more solid tribute.time out of mind the piratical proas of the malays, lurking amongthe low shaded coves and islets of sumatra, have sallied out upon thevessels sailing through the straits, fiercely demanding tribute at thepoint of their spears. though by the repeated bloody chastisements theyhave received at the hands of european cruisers, the audacity of thesecorsairs has of late been somewhat repressed; yet, even at the presentday, we occasionally hear of english and american vessels, which, inthose waters, have been remorselessly boarded and pillaged.with a fair, fresh wind, the pequod was now drawing nigh to thesestraits; ahab purposing to pass through them into the javan sea, andthence, cruising northwards, over waters known to be frequented here andthere by the sperm whale, sweep inshore by the philippine islands, andgain the far coast of japan, in time for the great whaling season there.by these means, the circumnavigating pequod would sweep almost all theknown sperm whale cruising grounds of the world, previous to descendingupon the line in the pacific; where ahab, though everywhere else foiledin his pursuit, firmly counted upon giving battle to moby dick, in thesea he was most known to frequent; and at a season when he might mostreasonably be presumed to be haunting it.but how now? in this zoned quest, does ahab touch no land? does his crewdrink air? surely, he will stop for water. nay. for a long time, now,the circus-running sun has raced within his fiery ring, and needs nosustenance but what's in himself. so ahab. mark this, too, in thewhaler. while other hulls are loaded down with alien stuff, to betransferred to foreign wharves; the world-wandering whale-ship carriesno cargo but herself and crew, their weapons and their wants. she has awhole lake's contents bottled in her ample hold. she is ballastedwith utilities; not altogether with unusable pig-lead and kentledge. shecarries years' water in her. clear old prime nantucket water; which,when three years afloat, the nantucketer, in the pacific, prefers todrink before the brackish fluid, but yesterday rafted off in casks, fromthe peruvian or indian streams. hence it is, that, while other ships mayhave gone to china from new york, and back again, touching at a scoreof ports, the whale-ship, in all that interval, may not have sightedone grain of soil; her crew having seen no man but floating seamen likethemselves. so that did you carry them the news that another flood hadcome; they would only answer_"well, boys, here's the ark!"now, as many sperm whales had been captured off the western coast ofjava, in the near vicinity of the straits of sunda; indeed, as most ofthe ground, roundabout, was generally recognised by the fishermen as anexcellent spot for cruising; therefore, as the pequod gained moreand more upon java head, the look-outs were repeatedly hailed, andadmonished to keep wide awake. but though the green palmy cliffs of theland soon loomed on the starboard bow, and with delighted nostrilsthe fresh cinnamon was snuffed in the air, yet not a single jet wasdescried. almost renouncing all thought of falling in with any gamehereabouts, the ship had well nigh entered the straits, when thecustomary cheering cry was heard from aloft, and ere long a spectacle ofsingular magnificence saluted us.but here be it premised, that owing to the unwearied activity with whichof late they have been hunted over all four oceans, the sperm whales,instead of almost invariably sailing in small detached companies, as informer times, are now frequently met with in extensive herds, sometimesembracing so great a multitude, that it would almost seem as ifnumerous nations of them had sworn solemn league and covenant for mutualassistance and protection. to this aggregation of the sperm whale intosuch immense caravans, may be imputed the circumstance that even in thebest cruising grounds, you may now sometimes sail for weeks and monthstogether, without being greeted by a single spout; and then be suddenlysaluted by what sometimes seems thousands on thousands.broad on both bows, at the distance of some two or three miles, andforming a great semicircle, embracing one half of the level horizon,a continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in thenoon-day air. unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets of the rightwhale, which, dividing at top, fall over in two branches, like the cleftdrooping boughs of a willow, the single forward-slanting spout of thesperm whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist, continuallyrising and falling away to leeward.seen from the pequod's deck, then, as she would rise on a high hill ofthe sea, this host of vapoury spouts, individually curling up into theair, and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze, showedlike the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis, descriedof a balmy autumnal morning, by some horseman on a height.as marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains,accelerate their march, all eagerness to place that perilous passage intheir rear, and once more expand in comparative security upon the plain;even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying forward throughthe straits; gradually contracting the wings of their semicircle, andswimming on, in one solid, but still crescentic centre.crowding all sail the pequod pressed after them; the harpooneershandling their weapons, and loudly cheering from the heads of theiryet suspended boats. if the wind only held, little doubt had they, thatchased through these straits of sunda, the vast host would only deployinto the oriental seas to witness the capture of not a few of theirnumber. and who could tell whether, in that congregated caravan, mobydick himself might not temporarily be swimming, like the worshippedwhite-elephant in the coronation procession of the siamese! so withstun-sail piled on stun-sail, we sailed along, driving these leviathansbefore us; when, of a sudden, the voice of tashtego was heard, loudlydirecting attention to something in our wake.corresponding to the crescent in our van, we beheld another in our rear.it seemed formed of detached white vapours, rising and falling somethinglike the spouts of the whales; only they did not so completely come andgo; for they constantly hovered, without finally disappearing. levellinghis glass at this sight, ahab quickly revolved in his pivot-hole,crying, "aloft there, and rig whips and buckets to wet thesails;_malays, sir, and after us!"as if too long lurking behind the headlands, till the pequod shouldfairly have entered the straits, these rascally asiatics were now in hotpursuit, to make up for their over-cautious delay. but when the swiftpequod, with a fresh leading wind, was herself in hot chase; how verykind of these tawny philanthropists to assist in speeding her on to herown chosen pursuit,_mere riding-whips and rowels to her, that theywere. as with glass under arm, ahab to-and-fro paced the deck; in hisforward turn beholding the monsters he chased, and in the after one thebloodthirsty pirates chasing him; some such fancy as the above seemedhis. and when he glanced upon the green walls of the watery defile inwhich the ship was then sailing, and bethought him that through thatgate lay the route to his vengeance, and beheld, how that through thatsame gate he was now both chasing and being chased to his deadly end;and not only that, but a herd of remorseless wild pirates andinhuman atheistical devils were infernally cheering him on with theircurses;_when all these conceits had passed through his brain, ahab'sbrow was left gaunt and ribbed, like the black sand beach after somestormy tide has been gnawing it, without being able to drag the firmthing from its place.but thoughts like these troubled very few of the reckless crew; andwhen, after steadily dropping and dropping the pirates astern, thepequod at last shot by the vivid green cockatoo point on the sumatraside, emerging at last upon the broad waters beyond; then, theharpooneers seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had been gainingupon the ship, than to rejoice that the ship had so victoriously gainedupon the malays. but still driving on in the wake of the whales, atlength they seemed abating their speed; gradually the ship neared them;and the wind now dying away, word was passed to spring to the boats. butno sooner did the herd, by some presumed wonderful instinct of the spermwhale, become notified of the three keels that were after them,_thoughas yet a mile in their rear,_than they rallied again, and formingin close ranks and battalions, so that their spouts all looked likeflashing lines of stacked bayonets, moved on with redoubled velocity.stripped to our shirts and drawers, we sprang to the white-ash, andafter several hours' pulling were almost disposed to renounce thechase, when a general pausing commotion among the whales gave animatingtoken that they were now at last under the influence of that strangeperplexity of inert irresolution, which, when the fishermen perceiveit in the whale, they say he is gallied. the compact martial columnsin which they had been hitherto rapidly and steadily swimming, were nowbroken up in one measureless rout; and like king porus' elephantsin the indian battle with alexander, they seemed going mad withconsternation. in all directions expanding in vast irregular circles,and aimlessly swimming hither and thither, by their short thickspoutings, they plainly betrayed their distraction of panic. this wasstill more strangely evinced by those of their number, who, completelyparalysed as it were, helplessly floated like water-logged dismantledships on the sea. had these leviathans been but a flock of simple sheep,pursued over the pasture by three fierce wolves, they could not possiblyhave evinced such excessive dismay. but this occasional timidity ischaracteristic of almost all herding creatures. though banding togetherin tens of thousands, the lion-maned buffaloes of the west have fledbefore a solitary horseman. witness, too, all human beings, how whenherded together in the sheepfold of a theatre's pit, they will, at theslightest alarm of fire, rush helter-skelter for the outlets, crowding,trampling, jamming, and remorselessly dashing each other to death. best,therefore, withhold any amazement at the strangely gallied whalesbefore us, for there is no folly of the beasts of the earth which is notinfinitely outdone by the madness of men.though many of the whales, as has been said, were in violent motion,yet it is to be observed that as a whole the herd neither advanced norretreated, but collectively remained in one place. as is customary inthose cases, the boats at once separated, each making for some one lonewhale on the outskirts of the shoal. in about three minutes' time,queequeg's harpoon was flung; the stricken fish darted blinding sprayin our faces, and then running away with us like light, steered straightfor the heart of the herd. though such a movement on the part of thewhale struck under such circumstances, is in no wise unprecedented; andindeed is almost always more or less anticipated; yet does it presentone of the more perilous vicissitudes of the fishery. for as the swiftmonster drags you deeper and deeper into the frantic shoal, you bidadieu to circumspect life and only exist in a delirious throb.as, blind and deaf, the whale plunged forward, as if by sheer power ofspeed to rid himself of the iron leech that had fastened to him; as wethus tore a white gash in the sea, on all sides menaced as we flew, bythe crazed creatures to and fro rushing about us; our beset boat waslike a ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tempest, and striving to steerthrough their complicated channels and straits, knowing not at whatmoment it may be locked in and crushed.but not a bit daunted, queequeg steered us manfully; now sheering offfrom this monster directly across our route in advance; now edging awayfrom that, whose colossal flukes were suspended overhead, while all thetime, starbuck stood up in the bows, lance in hand, pricking out of ourway whatever whales he could reach by short darts, for there was no timeto make long ones. nor were the oarsmen quite idle, though their wontedduty was now altogether dispensed with. they chiefly attended to theshouting part of the business. "out of the way, commodore!" criedone, to a great dromedary that of a sudden rose bodily to the surface,and for an instant threatened to swamp us. "hard down with your tail,there!" cried a second to another, which, close to our gunwale, seemedcalmly cooling himself with his own fan-like extremity.all whaleboats carry certain curious contrivances, originally inventedby the nantucket indians, called druggs. two thick squares of woodof equal size are stoutly clenched together, so that they cross eachother's grain at right angles; a line of considerable length is thenattached to the middle of this block, and the other end of the linebeing looped, it can in a moment be fastened to a harpoon. it is chieflyamong gallied whales that this drugg is used. for then, more whalesare close round you than you can possibly chase at one time. but spermwhales are not every day encountered; while you may, then, you mustkill all you can. and if you cannot kill them all at once, you must wingthem, so that they can be afterwards killed at your leisure. hence itis, that at times like these the drugg, comes into requisition. our boatwas furnished with three of them. the first and second were successfullydarted, and we saw the whales staggeringly running off, fettered by theenormous sidelong resistance of the towing drugg. they were cramped likemalefactors with the chain and ball. but upon flinging the third, in theact of tossing overboard the clumsy wooden block, it caught under oneof the seats of the boat, and in an instant tore it out and carried itaway, dropping the oarsman in the boat's bottom as the seat slid fromunder him. on both sides the sea came in at the wounded planks, but westuffed two or three drawers and shirts in, and so stopped the leaks forthe time.it had been next to impossible to dart these drugged-harpoons, wereit not that as we advanced into the herd, our whale's way greatlydiminished; moreover, that as we went still further and further from thecircumference of commotion, the direful disorders seemed waning. so thatwhen at last the jerking harpoon drew out, and the towing whale sidewaysvanished; then, with the tapering force of his parting momentum, weglided between two whales into the innermost heart of the shoal, as iffrom some mountain torrent we had slid into a serene valley lake. herethe storms in the roaring glens between the outermost whales, were heardbut not felt. in this central expanse the sea presented that smoothsatin-like surface, called a sleek, produced by the subtle moisturethrown off by the whale in his more quiet moods. yes, we were nowin that enchanted calm which they say lurks at the heart of everycommotion. and still in the distracted distance we beheld the tumults ofthe outer concentric circles, and saw successive pods of whales, eightor ten in each, swiftly going round and round, like multiplied spans ofhorses in a ring; and so closely shoulder to shoulder, that a titaniccircus-rider might easily have over-arched the middle ones, and so havegone round on their backs. owing to the density of the crowd of reposingwhales, more immediately surrounding the embayed axis of the herd, nopossible chance of escape was at present afforded us. we must watch fora breach in the living wall that hemmed us in; the wall that had onlyadmitted us in order to shut us up. keeping at the centre of the lake,we were occasionally visited by small tame cows and calves; the womenand children of this routed host.now, inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between the revolvingouter circles, and inclusive of the spaces between the various pods inany one of those circles, the entire area at this juncture, embraced bythe whole multitude, must have contained at least two or three squaremiles. at any rate_though indeed such a test at such a time might bedeceptive_spoutings might be discovered from our low boat thatseemed playing up almost from the rim of the horizon. i mention thiscircumstance, because, as if the cows and calves had been purposelylocked up in this innermost fold; and as if the wide extent of theherd had hitherto prevented them from learning the precise cause of itsstopping; or, possibly, being so young, unsophisticated, and every wayinnocent and inexperienced; however it may have been, these smallerwhales_now and then visiting our becalmed boat from the margin of thelake_evinced a wondrous fearlessness and confidence, or else a stillbecharmed panic which it was impossible not to marvel at. like householddogs they came snuffling round us, right up to our gunwales, andtouching them; till it almost seemed that some spell had suddenlydomesticated them. queequeg patted their foreheads; starbuck scratchedtheir backs with his lance; but fearful of the consequences, for thetime refrained from darting it.but far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface, another and stillstranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side. for, suspendedin those watery vaults, floated the forms of the nursing mothers of thewhales, and those that by their enormous girth seemed shortly tobecome mothers. the lake, as i have hinted, was to a considerable depthexceedingly transparent; and as human infants while suckling will calmlyand fixedly gaze away from the breast, as if leading two differentlives at the time; and while yet drawing mortal nourishment, be stillspiritually feasting upon some unearthly reminiscence;_even so did theyoung of these whales seem looking up towards us, but not at us, as ifwe were but a bit of gulfweed in their new-born sight. floating on theirsides, the mothers also seemed quietly eyeing us. one of these littleinfants, that from certain queer tokens seemed hardly a day old, mighthave measured some fourteen feet in length, and some six feet ingirth. he was a little frisky; though as yet his body seemed scarce yetrecovered from that irksome position it had so lately occupied in thematernal reticule; where, tail to head, and all ready for the finalspring, the unborn whale lies bent like a tartar's bow. the delicateside-fins, and the palms of his flukes, still freshly retained theplaited crumpled appearance of a baby's ears newly arrived fromforeign parts."line! line!" cried queequeg, looking over the gunwale; "himfast! him fast!_who line him! who struck?_two whale; one big, onelittle!""what ails ye, man?" cried starbuck."look-e here," said queequeg, pointing down.as when the stricken whale, that from the tub has reeled out hundreds offathoms of rope; as, after deep sounding, he floats up again, and showsthe slackened curling line buoyantly rising and spiralling towards theair; so now, starbuck saw long coils of the umbilical cord of madameleviathan, by which the young cub seemed still tethered to its dam. notseldom in the rapid vicissitudes of the chase, this natural line, withthe maternal end loose, becomes entangled with the hempen one, so thatthe cub is thereby trapped. some of the subtlest secrets of the seasseemed divulged to us in this enchanted pond. we saw young leviathanamours in the deep.**the sperm whale, as with all other species of the leviathan, but unlikemost other fish, breeds indifferently at all seasons; after a gestationwhich may probably be set down at nine months, producing but one at atime; though in some few known instances giving birth to an esau andjacob:_a contingency provided for in suckling by two teats, curiouslysituated, one on each side of the anus; but the breasts themselvesextend upwards from that. when by chance these precious parts in anursing whale are cut by the hunter's lance, the mother's pouringmilk and blood rivallingly discolour the sea for rods. the milk isvery sweet and rich; it has been tasted by man; it might do well withstrawberries. when overflowing with mutual esteem, the whales salutemore hominum.and thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternationsand affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freely andfearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yea, serenely revelledin dalliance and delight. but even so, amid the tornadoed atlantic ofmy being, do i myself still for ever centrally disport in mute calm; andwhile ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve round me, deep down anddeep inland there i still bathe me in eternal mildness of joy.meanwhile, as we thus lay entranced, the occasional sudden franticspectacles in the distance evinced the activity of the other boats,still engaged in drugging the whales on the frontier of the host; orpossibly carrying on the war within the first circle, where abundance ofroom and some convenient retreats were afforded them. but the sightof the enraged drugged whales now and then blindly darting to and froacross the circles, was nothing to what at last met our eyes. it issometimes the custom when fast to a whale more than commonly powerfuland alert, to seek to hamstring him, as it were, by sundering ormaiming his gigantic tail-tendon. it is done by darting a short-handledcutting-spade, to which is attached a rope for hauling it back again.a whale wounded (as we afterwards learned) in this part, but noteffectually, as it seemed, had broken away from the boat, carrying alongwith him half of the harpoon line; and in the extraordinary agony ofthe wound, he was now dashing among the revolving circles like the lonemounted desperado arnold, at the battle of saratoga, carrying dismaywherever he went.but agonizing as was the wound of this whale, and an appalling spectacleenough, any way; yet the peculiar horror with which he seemed toinspire the rest of the herd, was owing to a cause which at first theintervening distance obscured from us. but at length we perceived thatby one of the unimaginable accidents of the fishery, this whale hadbecome entangled in the harpoon-line that he towed; he had also runaway with the cutting-spade in him; and while the free end of the ropeattached to that weapon, had permanently caught in the coils of theharpoon-line round his tail, the cutting-spade itself had worked loosefrom his flesh. so that tormented to madness, he was now churningthrough the water, violently flailing with his flexible tail, andtossing the keen spade about him, wounding and murdering his owncomrades.this terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from theirstationary fright. first, the whales forming the margin of our lakebegan to crowd a little, and tumble against each other, as if liftedby half spent billows from afar; then the lake itself began faintly toheave and swell; the submarine bridal-chambers and nurseries vanished;in more and more contracting orbits the whales in the more centralcircles began to swim in thickening clusters. yes, the long calm wasdeparting. a low advancing hum was soon heard; and then like to thetumultuous masses of block-ice when the great river hudson breaks up inspring, the entire host of whales came tumbling upon their inner centre,as if to pile themselves up in one common mountain. instantly starbuckand queequeg changed places; starbuck taking the stern."oars! oars!" he intensely whispered, seizing the helm_"gripeyour oars, and clutch your souls, now! my god, men, stand by! shovehim off, you queequeg_the whale there!_prick him!_hit him! standup_stand up, and stay so! spring, men_pull, men; never mind theirbacks_scrape them!_scrape away!"the boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks, leaving anarrow dardanelles between their long lengths. but by desperate endeavorwe at last shot into a temporary opening; then giving way rapidly,and at the same time earnestly watching for another outlet. after manysimilar hair-breadth escapes, we at last swiftly glided into what hadjust been one of the outer circles, but now crossed by random whales,all violently making for one centre. this lucky salvation was cheaplypurchased by the loss of queequeg's hat, who, while standing in thebows to prick the fugitive whales, had his hat taken clean from his headby the air-eddy made by the sudden tossing of a pair of broad flukesclose by.riotous and disordered as the universal commotion now was, it soonresolved itself into what seemed a systematic movement; for havingclumped together at last in one dense body, they then renewed theironward flight with augmented fleetness. further pursuit was useless; butthe boats still lingered in their wake to pick up what drugged whalesmight be dropped astern, and likewise to secure one which flask hadkilled and waifed. the waif is a pennoned pole, two or three of whichare carried by every boat; and which, when additional game is at hand,are inserted upright into the floating body of a dead whale, both tomark its place on the sea, and also as token of prior possession, shouldthe boats of any other ship draw near.the result of this lowering was somewhat illustrative of that sagacioussaying in the fishery,_the more whales the less fish. of all thedrugged whales only one was captured. the rest contrived to escape forthe time, but only to be taken, as will hereafter be seen, by some othercraft than the pequod.chapter 88. schools and schoolmasters.the previous chapter gave account of an immense body or herd of spermwhales, and there was also then given the probable cause inducing thosevast aggregations.now, though such great bodies are at times encountered, yet, as musthave been seen, even at the present day, small detached bands areoccasionally observed, embracing from twenty to fifty individuals each.such bands are known as schools. they generally are of two sorts; thosecomposed almost entirely of females, and those mustering none but youngvigorous males, or bulls, as they are familiarly designated.in cavalier attendance upon the school of females, you invariably see amale of full grown magnitude, but not old; who, upon any alarm, evinceshis gallantry by falling in the rear and covering the flight of hisladies. in truth, this gentleman is a luxurious ottoman, swimming aboutover the watery world, surroundingly accompanied by all the solacesand endearments of the harem. the contrast between this ottoman andhis concubines is striking; because, while he is always of the largestleviathanic proportions, the ladies, even at full growth, are notmore than one-third of the bulk of an average-sized male. they arecomparatively delicate, indeed; i dare say, not to exceed half a dozenyards round the waist. nevertheless, it cannot be denied, that upon thewhole they are hereditarily entitled to embonpoint.it is very curious to watch this harem and its lord in their indolentramblings. like fashionables, they are for ever on the move in leisurelysearch of variety. you meet them on the line in time for the full flowerof the equatorial feeding season, having just returned, perhaps, fromspending the summer in the northern seas, and so cheating summer of allunpleasant weariness and warmth. by the time they have lounged up anddown the promenade of the equator awhile, they start for the orientalwaters in anticipation of the cool season there, and so evade the otherexcessive temperature of the year.when serenely advancing on one of these journeys, if any strangesuspicious sights are seen, my lord whale keeps a wary eye on hisinteresting family. should any unwarrantably pert young leviathan comingthat way, presume to draw confidentially close to one of the ladies,with what prodigious fury the bashaw assails him, and chases him away!high times, indeed, if unprincipled young rakes like him are to bepermitted to invade the sanctity of domestic bliss; though do what thebashaw will, he cannot keep the most notorious lothario out of his bed;for, alas! all fish bed in common. as ashore, the ladies often cause themost terrible duels among their rival admirers; just so with the whales,who sometimes come to deadly battle, and all for love. they fence withtheir long lower jaws, sometimes locking them together, and so strivingfor the supremacy like elks that warringly interweave their antlers. nota few are captured having the deep scars of these encounters,_furrowedheads, broken teeth, scolloped fins; and in some instances, wrenched anddislocated mouths.but supposing the invader of domestic bliss to betake himself away atthe first rush of the harem's lord, then is it very diverting towatch that lord. gently he insinuates his vast bulk among them again andrevels there awhile, still in tantalizing vicinity to young lothario,like pious solomon devoutly worshipping among his thousand concubines.granting other whales to be in sight, the fishermen will seldom givechase to one of these grand turks; for these grand turks are too lavishof their strength, and hence their unctuousness is small. as for thesons and the daughters they beget, why, those sons and daughters musttake care of themselves; at least, with only the maternal help. forlike certain other omnivorous roving lovers that might be named, my lordwhale has no taste for the nursery, however much for the bower; and so,being a great traveller, he leaves his anonymous babies all over theworld; every baby an exotic. in good time, nevertheless, as the ardourof youth declines; as years and dumps increase; as reflection lendsher solemn pauses; in short, as a general lassitude overtakes the satedturk; then a love of ease and virtue supplants the love for maidens; ourottoman enters upon the impotent, repentant, admonitory stage of life,forswears, disbands the harem, and grown to an exemplary, sulky oldsoul, goes about all alone among the meridians and parallels saying hisprayers, and warning each young leviathan from his amorous errors.now, as the harem of whales is called by the fishermen a school, sois the lord and master of that school technically known as theschoolmaster. it is therefore not in strict character, however admirablysatirical, that after going to school himself, he should then go abroadinculcating not what he learned there, but the folly of it. his title,schoolmaster, would very naturally seem derived from the name bestowedupon the harem itself, but some have surmised that the man who firstthus entitled this sort of ottoman whale, must have read the memoirs ofvidocq, and informed himself what sort of a country-schoolmaster thatfamous frenchman was in his younger days, and what was the nature ofthose occult lessons he inculcated into some of his pupils.the same secludedness and isolation to which the schoolmaster whalebetakes himself in his advancing years, is true of all aged spermwhales. almost universally, a lone whale_as a solitary leviathanis called_proves an ancient one. like venerable moss-bearded danielboone, he will have no one near him but nature herself; and her hetakes to wife in the wilderness of waters, and the best of wives she is,though she keeps so many moody secrets.the schools composing none but young and vigorous males, previouslymentioned, offer a strong contrast to the harem schools. for whilethose female whales are characteristically timid, the young males, orforty-barrel-bulls, as they call them, are by far the most pugnaciousof all leviathans, and proverbially the most dangerous to encounter;excepting those wondrous grey-headed, grizzled whales, sometimes met,and these will fight you like grim fiends exasperated by a penal gout.the forty-barrel-bull schools are larger than the harem schools. likea mob of young collegians, they are full of fight, fun, and wickedness,tumbling round the world at such a reckless, rollicking rate, that noprudent underwriter would insure them any more than he would a riotouslad at yale or harvard. they soon relinquish this turbulence though,and when about three-fourths grown, break up, and separately go about inquest of settlements, that is, harems.another point of difference between the male and female schools isstill more characteristic of the sexes. say you strike aforty-barrel-bull_poor devil! all his comrades quit him. but strikea member of the harem school, and her companions swim around her withevery token of concern, sometimes lingering so near her and so long, asthemselves to fall a prey.chapter 89. fast-fish and loose-fish.the allusion to the waif and waif-poles in the last chapter but one,necessitates some account of the laws and regulations of the whalefishery, of which the waif may be deemed the grand symbol and badge.it frequently happens that when several ships are cruising in company,a whale may be struck by one vessel, then escape, and be finally killedand captured by another vessel; and herein are indirectly comprisedmany minor contingencies, all partaking of this one grand feature. forexample,_after a weary and perilous chase and capture of a whale,the body may get loose from the ship by reason of a violent storm; anddrifting far away to leeward, be retaken by a second whaler, who, in acalm, snugly tows it alongside, without risk of life or line. thusthe most vexatious and violent disputes would often arise betweenthe fishermen, were there not some written or unwritten, universal,undisputed law applicable to all cases.perhaps the only formal whaling code authorized by legislativeenactment, was that of holland. it was decreed by the states-general ina.d. 1695. but though no other nation has ever had any written whalinglaw, yet the american fishermen have been their own legislators andlawyers in this matter. they have provided a system which for tersecomprehensiveness surpasses justinian's pandects and the by-lawsof the chinese society for the suppression of meddling with otherpeople's business. yes; these laws might be engraven on a queenanne's farthing, or the barb of a harpoon, and worn round the neck, sosmall are they.i. a fast-fish belongs to the party fast to it.ii. a loose-fish is fair game for anybody who can soonest catch it.but what plays the mischief with this masterly code is the admirablebrevity of it, which necessitates a vast volume of commentaries toexpound it.first: what is a fast-fish? alive or dead a fish is technically fast,when it is connected with an occupied ship or boat, by any medium at allcontrollable by the occupant or occupants,_a mast, an oar, a nine-inchcable, a telegraph wire, or a strand of cobweb, it is all the same.likewise a fish is technically fast when it bears a waif, or any otherrecognised symbol of possession; so long as the party waifing it plainlyevince their ability at any time to take it alongside, as well as theirintention so to do.these are scientific commentaries; but the commentaries of the whalementhemselves sometimes consist in hard words and harder knocks_thecoke-upon-littleton of the fist. true, among the more upright andhonourable whalemen allowances are always made for peculiar cases,where it would be an outrageous moral injustice for one party to claimpossession of a whale previously chased or killed by another party. butothers are by no means so scrupulous.some fifty years ago there was a curious case of whale-trover litigatedin england, wherein the plaintiffs set forth that after a hard chase ofa whale in the northern seas; and when indeed they (the plaintiffs) hadsucceeded in harpooning the fish; they were at last, through peril oftheir lives, obliged to forsake not only their lines, but their boatitself. ultimately the defendants (the crew of another ship) came upwith the whale, struck, killed, seized, and finally appropriated itbefore the very eyes of the plaintiffs. and when those defendantswere remonstrated with, their captain snapped his fingers in theplaintiffs' teeth, and assured them that by way of doxology to thedeed he had done, he would now retain their line, harpoons, and boat,which had remained attached to the whale at the time of the seizure.wherefore the plaintiffs now sued for the recovery of the value of theirwhale, line, harpoons, and boat.mr. erskine was counsel for the defendants; lord ellenborough wasthe judge. in the course of the defence, the witty erskine went onto illustrate his position, by alluding to a recent crim. con. case,wherein a gentleman, after in vain trying to bridle his wife'sviciousness, had at last abandoned her upon the seas of life; but inthe course of years, repenting of that step, he instituted an action torecover possession of her. erskine was on the other side; and hethen supported it by saying, that though the gentleman had originallyharpooned the lady, and had once had her fast, and only by reason of thegreat stress of her plunging viciousness, had at last abandoned her; yetabandon her he did, so that she became a loose-fish; and thereforewhen a subsequent gentleman re-harpooned her, the lady then became thatsubsequent gentleman's property, along with whatever harpoon mighthave been found sticking in her.now in the present case erskine contended that the examples of the whaleand the lady were reciprocally illustrative of each other.these pleadings, and the counter pleadings, being duly heard, the verylearned judge in set terms decided, to wit,_that as for the boat, heawarded it to the plaintiffs, because they had merely abandoned itto save their lives; but that with regard to the controverted whale,harpoons, and line, they belonged to the defendants; the whale, becauseit was a loose-fish at the time of the final capture; and the harpoonsand line because when the fish made off with them, it (the fish)acquired a property in those articles; and hence anybody who afterwardstook the fish had a right to them. now the defendants afterwards tookthe fish; ergo, the aforesaid articles were theirs.a common man looking at this decision of the very learned judge, mightpossibly object to it. but ploughed up to the primary rock of thematter, the two great principles laid down in the twin whaling lawspreviously quoted, and applied and elucidated by lord ellenborough inthe above cited case; these two laws touching fast-fish and loose-fish,i say, will, on reflection, be found the fundamentals of all humanjurisprudence; for notwithstanding its complicated tracery of sculpture,the temple of the law, like the temple of the philistines, has but twoprops to stand on.is it not a saying in every one's mouth, possession is half of thelaw: that is, regardless of how the thing came into possession? butoften possession is the whole of the law. what are the sinews and soulsof russian serfs and republican slaves but fast-fish, whereof possessionis the whole of the law? what to the rapacious landlord is the widow'slast mite but a fast-fish? what is yonder undetected villain's marblemansion with a door-plate for a waif; what is that but a fast-fish?what is the ruinous discount which mordecai, the broker, gets from poorwoebegone, the bankrupt, on a loan to keep woebegone's family fromstarvation; what is that ruinous discount but a fast-fish? what is thearchbishop of savesoul's income of l100,000 seized from the scantbread and cheese of hundreds of thousands of broken-backed laborers (allsure of heaven without any of savesoul's help) what is that globularl100,000 but a fast-fish? what are the duke of dunder's hereditarytowns and hamlets but fast-fish? what to that redoubted harpooneer, johnbull, is poor ireland, but a fast-fish? what to that apostolic lancer,brother jonathan, is texas but a fast-fish? and concerning all these, isnot possession the whole of the law?but if the doctrine of fast-fish be pretty generally applicable,the kindred doctrine of loose-fish is still more widely so. that isinternationally and universally applicable.what was america in 1492 but a loose-fish, in which columbus struck thespanish standard by way of waifing it for his royal master and mistress?what was poland to the czar? what greece to the turk? what indiato england? what at last will mexico be to the united states? allloose-fish.what are the rights of man and the liberties of the world butloose-fish? what all men's minds and opinions but loose-fish? what isthe principle of religious belief in them but a loose-fish? what tothe ostentatious smuggling verbalists are the thoughts of thinkers butloose-fish? what is the great globe itself but a loose-fish? and whatare you, reader, but a loose-fish and a fast-fish, too?chapter 90. heads or tails."de balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam."bracton, l. 3, c. 3.latin from the books of the laws of england, which taken along with thecontext, means, that of all whales captured by anybody on the coast ofthat land, the king, as honourary grand harpooneer, must have the head,and the queen be respectfully presented with the tail. a division which,in the whale, is much like halving an apple; there is no intermediateremainder. now as this law, under a modified form, is to this day inforce in england; and as it offers in various respects a strange anomalytouching the general law of fast and loose-fish, it is here treated ofin a separate chapter, on the same courteous principle that promptsthe english railways to be at the expense of a separate car, speciallyreserved for the accommodation of royalty. in the first place, incurious proof of the fact that the above-mentioned law is still inforce, i proceed to lay before you a circumstance that happened withinthe last two years.it seems that some honest mariners of dover, or sandwich, or some oneof the cinque ports, had after a hard chase succeeded in killing andbeaching a fine whale which they had originally descried afar off fromthe shore. now the cinque ports are partially or somehow under thejurisdiction of a sort of policeman or beadle, called a lord warden.holding the office directly from the crown, i believe, all the royalemoluments incident to the cinque port territories become by assignmenthis. by some writers this office is called a sinecure. but not so.because the lord warden is busily employed at times in fobbing hisperquisites; which are his chiefly by virtue of that same fobbing ofthem.now when these poor sun-burnt mariners, bare-footed, and with theirtrowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wearily hauled their fatfish high and dry, promising themselves a good l150 from the preciousoil and bone; and in fantasy sipping rare tea with their wives, and goodale with their cronies, upon the strength of their respective shares; upsteps a very learned and most christian and charitable gentleman, with acopy of blackstone under his arm; and laying it upon the whale's head,he says_"hands off! this fish, my masters, is a fast-fish. i seizeit as the lord warden's." upon this the poor mariners in theirrespectful consternation_so truly english_knowing not what to say,fall to vigorously scratching their heads all round; meanwhile ruefullyglancing from the whale to the stranger. but that did in nowise mend thematter, or at all soften the hard heart of the learned gentleman withthe copy of blackstone. at length one of them, after long scratchingabout for his ideas, made bold to speak,"please, sir, who is the lord warden?""the duke.""but the duke had nothing to do with taking this fish?""it is his.""we have been at great trouble, and peril, and some expense, and isall that to go to the duke's benefit; we getting nothing at all forour pains but our blisters?""it is his.""is the duke so very poor as to be forced to this desperate mode ofgetting a livelihood?""it is his.""i thought to relieve my old bed-ridden mother by part of my share ofthis whale.""it is his.""won't the duke be content with a quarter or a half?""it is his."in a word, the whale was seized and sold, and his grace the duke ofwellington received the money. thinking that viewed in some particularlights, the case might by a bare possibility in some small degree bedeemed, under the circumstances, a rather hard one, an honest clergymanof the town respectfully addressed a note to his grace, begging him totake the case of those unfortunate mariners into full consideration. towhich my lord duke in substance replied (both letters were published)that he had already done so, and received the money, and would beobliged to the reverend gentleman if for the future he (the reverendgentleman) would decline meddling with other people's business. isthis the still militant old man, standing at the corners of the threekingdoms, on all hands coercing alms of beggars?it will readily be seen that in this case the alleged right of theduke to the whale was a delegated one from the sovereign. we must needsinquire then on what principle the sovereign is originally invested withthat right. the law itself has already been set forth. but plowdon givesus the reason for it. says plowdon, the whale so caught belongs to theking and queen, "because of its superior excellence." and by thesoundest commentators this has ever been held a cogent argument in suchmatters.but why should the king have the head, and the queen the tail? a reasonfor that, ye lawyers!in his treatise on "queen-gold," or queen-pinmoney, an old king'sbench author, one william prynne, thus discourseth: "ye tail isye queen's, that ye queen's wardrobe may be supplied with yewhalebone." now this was written at a time when the black limber boneof the greenland or right whale was largely used in ladies' bodices.but this same bone is not in the tail; it is in the head, which is a sadmistake for a sagacious lawyer like prynne. but is the queen a mermaid,to be presented with a tail? an allegorical meaning may lurk here.there are two royal fish so styled by the english law writers_thewhale and the sturgeon; both royal property under certain limitations,and nominally supplying the tenth branch of the crown's ordinaryrevenue. i know not that any other author has hinted of the matter; butby inference it seems to me that the sturgeon must be divided in thesame way as the whale, the king receiving the highly dense and elastichead peculiar to that fish, which, symbolically regarded, may possiblybe humorously grounded upon some presumed congeniality. and thus thereseems a reason in all things, even in law.chapter 91. the pequod meets the rose-bud."in vain it was to rake for ambergriese in the paunch of thisleviathan, insufferable fetor denying not inquiry." sir t. browne,v.e.it was a week or two after the last whaling scene recounted, and when wewere slowly sailing over a sleepy, vapoury, mid-day sea, that the manynoses on the pequod's deck proved more vigilant discoverers than thethree pairs of eyes aloft. a peculiar and not very pleasant smell wassmelt in the sea."i will bet something now," said stubb, "that somewhere hereaboutsare some of those drugged whales we tickled the other day. i thoughtthey would keel up before long."presently, the vapours in advance slid aside; and there in the distancelay a ship, whose furled sails betokened that some sort of whale must bealongside. as we glided nearer, the stranger showed french colours fromhis peak; and by the eddying cloud of vulture sea-fowl that circled, andhovered, and swooped around him, it was plain that the whale alongsidemust be what the fishermen call a blasted whale, that is, a whale thathas died unmolested on the sea, and so floated an unappropriated corpse.it may well be conceived, what an unsavory odor such a mass mustexhale; worse than an assyrian city in the plague, when the living areincompetent to bury the departed. so intolerable indeed is it regardedby some, that no cupidity could persuade them to moor alongside of it.yet are there those who will still do it; notwithstanding the fact thatthe oil obtained from such subjects is of a very inferior quality, andby no means of the nature of attar-of-rose.coming still nearer with the expiring breeze, we saw that the frenchmanhad a second whale alongside; and this second whale seemed even moreof a nosegay than the first. in truth, it turned out to be one ofthose problematical whales that seem to dry up and die with a sortof prodigious dyspepsia, or indigestion; leaving their defunct bodiesalmost entirely bankrupt of anything like oil. nevertheless, in theproper place we shall see that no knowing fisherman will ever turnup his nose at such a whale as this, however much he may shun blastedwhales in general.the pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger, that stubb vowedhe recognised his cutting spade-pole entangled in the lines that wereknotted round the tail of one of these whales."there's a pretty fellow, now," he banteringly laughed, standingin the ship's bows, "there's a jackal for ye! i well knowthat these crappoes of frenchmen are but poor devils in the fishery;sometimes lowering their boats for breakers, mistaking them for spermwhale spouts; yes, and sometimes sailing from their port with their holdfull of boxes of tallow candles, and cases of snuffers, foreseeing thatall the oil they will get won't be enough to dip the captain's wickinto; aye, we all know these things; but look ye, here's a crappo thatis content with our leavings, the drugged whale there, i mean; aye, andis content too with scraping the dry bones of that other precious fishhe has there. poor devil! i say, pass round a hat, some one, and let'smake him a present of a little oil for dear charity's sake. for whatoil he'll get from that drugged whale there, wouldn't be fit to burnin a jail; no, not in a condemned cell. and as for the other whale, why,i'll agree to get more oil by chopping up and trying out these threemasts of ours, than he'll get from that bundle of bones; though, nowthat i think of it, it may contain something worth a good deal more thanoil; yes, ambergris. i wonder now if our old man has thought of that.it's worth trying. yes, i'm for it;" and so saying he started forthe quarter-deck.by this time the faint air had become a complete calm; so that whetheror no, the pequod was now fairly entrapped in the smell, with no hope ofescaping except by its breezing up again. issuing from the cabin, stubbnow called his boat's crew, and pulled off for the stranger. drawingacross her bow, he perceived that in accordance with the fanciful frenchtaste, the upper part of her stem-piece was carved in the likeness of ahuge drooping stalk, was painted green, and for thorns had copperspikes projecting from it here and there; the whole terminating in asymmetrical folded bulb of a bright red colour. upon her head boards,in large gilt letters, he read "bouton de rose,"_rose-button, orrose-bud; and this was the romantic name of this aromatic ship.though stubb did not understand the bouton part of the inscription, yetthe word rose, and the bulbous figure-head put together, sufficientlyexplained the whole to him."a wooden rose-bud, eh?" he cried with his hand to his nose, "thatwill do very well; but how like all creation it smells!"now in order to hold direct communication with the people on deck, hehad to pull round the bows to the starboard side, and thus come close tothe blasted whale; and so talk over it.arrived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose, hebawled_"bouton-de-rose, ahoy! are there any of you bouton-de-rosesthat speak english?""yes," rejoined a guernsey-man from the bulwarks, who turned out tobe the chief-mate."well, then, my bouton-de-rose-bud, have you seen the white whale?""what whale?""the white whale_a sperm whale_moby dick, have ye seen him?"never heard of such a whale. cachalot blanche! white whale_no.""very good, then; good bye now, and i'll call again in a minute."then rapidly pulling back towards the pequod, and seeing ahab leaningover the quarter-deck rail awaiting his report, he moulded his two handsinto a trumpet and shouted_"no, sir! no!" upon which ahab retired,and stubb returned to the frenchman.he now perceived that the guernsey-man, who had just got into thechains, and was using a cutting-spade, had slung his nose in a sort ofbag."what's the matter with your nose, there?" said stubb. "brokeit?""i wish it was broken, or that i didn't have any nose at all!"answered the guernsey-man, who did not seem to relish the job he was atvery much. "but what are you holding yours for?""oh, nothing! it's a wax nose; i have to hold it on. fine day,ain't it? air rather gardenny, i should say; throw us a bunch ofposies, will ye, bouton-de-rose?""what in the devil's name do you want here?" roared theguernseyman, flying into a sudden passion."oh! keep cool_cool? yes, that's the word! why don't you packthose whales in ice while you're working at _em? but joking aside,though; do you know, rose-bud, that it's all nonsense trying to getany oil out of such whales? as for that dried up one, there, he hasn'ta gill in his whole carcase.""i know that well enough; but, d'ye see, the captain here won'tbelieve it; this is his first voyage; he was a cologne manufacturerbefore. but come aboard, and mayhap he'll believe you, if he won'tme; and so i'll get out of this dirty scrape.""anything to oblige ye, my sweet and pleasant fellow," rejoinedstubb, and with that he soon mounted to the deck. there a queer scenepresented itself. the sailors, in tasselled caps of red worsted, weregetting the heavy tackles in readiness for the whales. but they workedrather slow and talked very fast, and seemed in anything but a goodhumor. all their noses upwardly projected from their faces like so manyjib-booms. now and then pairs of them would drop their work, and run upto the mast-head to get some fresh air. some thinking they would catchthe plague, dipped oakum in coal-tar, and at intervals held it to theirnostrils. others having broken the stems of their pipes almost shortoff at the bowl, were vigorously puffing tobacco-smoke, so that itconstantly filled their olfactories.stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceeding fromthe captain's round-house abaft; and looking in that direction saw afiery face thrust from behind the door, which was held ajar from within.this was the tormented surgeon, who, after in vain remonstrating againstthe proceedings of the day, had betaken himself to the captain'sround-house (cabinet he called it) to avoid the pest; but still, couldnot help yelling out his entreaties and indignations at times.marking all this, stubb argued well for his scheme, and turning to theguernsey-man had a little chat with him, during which the stranger mateexpressed his detestation of his captain as a conceited ignoramus,who had brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitable a pickle.sounding him carefully, stubb further perceived that the guernsey-manhad not the slightest suspicion concerning the ambergris. he thereforeheld his peace on that head, but otherwise was quite frank andconfidential with him, so that the two quickly concocted a little planfor both circumventing and satirizing the captain, without his at alldreaming of distrusting their sincerity. according to this little planof theirs, the guernsey-man, under cover of an interpreter's office,was to tell the captain what he pleased, but as coming from stubb; andas for stubb, he was to utter any nonsense that should come uppermost inhim during the interview.by this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin. he was asmall and dark, but rather delicate looking man for a sea-captain, withlarge whiskers and moustache, however; and wore a red cotton velvet vestwith watch-seals at his side. to this gentleman, stubb was now politelyintroduced by the guernsey-man, who at once ostentatiously put on theaspect of interpreting between them."what shall i say to him first?" said he."why," said stubb, eyeing the velvet vest and the watch and seals,"you may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort of babyishto me, though i don't pretend to be a judge.""he says, monsieur," said the guernsey-man, in french, turningto his captain, "that only yesterday his ship spoke a vessel, whosecaptain and chief-mate, with six sailors, had all died of a fever caughtfrom a blasted whale they had brought alongside."upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more."what now?" said the guernsey-man to stubb."why, since he takes it so easy, tell him that now i have eyed himcarefully, i'm quite certain that he's no more fit to command awhale-ship than a st. jago monkey. in fact, tell him from me he's ababoon.""he vows and declares, monsieur, that the other whale, the dried one,is far more deadly than the blasted one; in fine, monsieur, he conjuresus, as we value our lives, to cut loose from these fish."instantly the captain ran forward, and in a loud voice commanded hiscrew to desist from hoisting the cutting-tackles, and at once cast loosethe cables and chains confining the whales to the ship."what now?" said the guernsey-man, when the captain had returned tothem."why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now that_that_infact, tell him i've diddled him, and (aside to himself) perhapssomebody else.""he says, monsieur, that he's very happy to have been of any serviceto us."hearing this, the captain vowed that they were the grateful parties(meaning himself and mate) and concluded by inviting stubb down into hiscabin to drink a bottle of bordeaux."he wants you to take a glass of wine with him," said theinterpreter."thank him heartily; but tell him it's against my principles todrink with the man i've diddled. in fact, tell him i must go.""he says, monsieur, that his principles won't admit of his drinking;but that if monsieur wants to live another day to drink, then monsieurhad best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away from these whales,for it's so calm they won't drift."by this time stubb was over the side, and getting into his boat, hailedthe guernsey-man to this effect,_that having a long tow-line in hisboat, he would do what he could to help them, by pulling out the lighterwhale of the two from the ship's side. while the frenchman's boats,then, were engaged in towing the ship one way, stubb benevolently towedaway at his whale the other way, ostentatiously slacking out a mostunusually long tow-line.presently a breeze sprang up; stubb feigned to cast off from the whale;hoisting his boats, the frenchman soon increased his distance, while thepequod slid in between him and stubb's whale. whereupon stubb quicklypulled to the floating body, and hailing the pequod to give notice ofhis intentions, at once proceeded to reap the fruit of his unrighteouscunning. seizing his sharp boat-spade, he commenced an excavation in thebody, a little behind the side fin. you would almost have thought he wasdigging a cellar there in the sea; and when at length his spade struckagainst the gaunt ribs, it was like turning up old roman tiles andpottery buried in fat english loam. his boat's crew were all in highexcitement, eagerly helping their chief, and looking as anxious asgold-hunters.and all the time numberless fowls were diving, and ducking, andscreaming, and yelling, and fighting around them. stubb was beginningto look disappointed, especially as the horrible nosegay increased, whensuddenly from out the very heart of this plague, there stole a faintstream of perfume, which flowed through the tide of bad smells withoutbeing absorbed by it, as one river will flow into and then along withanother, without at all blending with it for a time."i have it, i have it," cried stubb, with delight, strikingsomething in the subterranean regions, "a purse! a purse!"dropping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out handfulsof something that looked like ripe windsor soap, or rich mottled oldcheese; very unctuous and savory withal. you might easily dent it withyour thumb; it is of a hue between yellow and ash colour. and this, goodfriends, is ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any druggist.some six handfuls were obtained; but more was unavoidably lost in thesea, and still more, perhaps, might have been secured were it not forimpatient ahab's loud command to stubb to desist, and come on board,else the ship would bid them good bye.chapter 92. ambergris.now this ambergris is a very curious substance, and so important asan article of commerce, that in 1791 a certain nantucket-born captaincoffin was examined at the bar of the english house of commons on thatsubject. for at that time, and indeed until a comparatively late day,the precise origin of ambergris remained, like amber itself, a problemto the learned. though the word ambergris is but the french compound forgrey amber, yet the two substances are quite distinct. for amber, thoughat times found on the sea-coast, is also dug up in some far inlandsoils, whereas ambergris is never found except upon the sea. besides,amber is a hard, transparent, brittle, odorless substance, used formouth-pieces to pipes, for beads and ornaments; but ambergris is soft,waxy, and so highly fragrant and spicy, that it is largely used inperfumery, in pastiles, precious candles, hair-powders, and pomatum.the turks use it in cooking, and also carry it to mecca, for the samepurpose that frankincense is carried to st. peter's in rome. some winemerchants drop a few grains into claret, to flavor it.who would think, then, that such fine ladies and gentlemen should regalethemselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels of a sickwhale! yet so it is. by some, ambergris is supposed to be the cause, andby others the effect, of the dyspepsia in the whale. how to cure sucha dyspepsia it were hard to say, unless by administering three or fourboat loads of brandreth's pills, and then running out of harm's way,as laborers do in blasting rocks.i have forgotten to say that there were found in this ambergris,certain hard, round, bony plates, which at first stubb thought might besailors' trowsers buttons; but it afterwards turned out that they werenothing more than pieces of small squid bones embalmed in that manner.now that the incorruption of this most fragrant ambergris should befound in the heart of such decay; is this nothing? bethink thee of thatsaying of st. paul in corinthians, about corruption and incorruption;how that we are sown in dishonour, but raised in glory. and likewisecall to mind that saying of paracelsus about what it is that makeththe best musk. also forget not the strange fact that of all things ofill-savor, cologne-water, in its rudimental manufacturing stages, is theworst.i should like to conclude the chapter with the above appeal, but cannot,owing to my anxiety to repel a charge often made against whalemen,and which, in the estimation of some already biased minds, might beconsidered as indirectly substantiated by what has been said of thefrenchman's two whales. elsewhere in this volume the slanderousaspersion has been disproved, that the vocation of whaling is throughouta slatternly, untidy business. but there is another thing to rebut. theyhint that all whales always smell bad. now how did this odious stigmaoriginate?i opine, that it is plainly traceable to the first arrival of thegreenland whaling ships in london, more than two centuries ago. becausethose whalemen did not then, and do not now, try out their oil at sea asthe southern ships have always done; but cutting up the fresh blubber insmall bits, thrust it through the bung holes of large casks, and carryit home in that manner; the shortness of the season in those icy seas,and the sudden and violent storms to which they are exposed, forbiddingany other course. the consequence is, that upon breaking into the hold,and unloading one of these whale cemeteries, in the greenland dock, asavor is given forth somewhat similar to that arising from excavating anold city grave-yard, for the foundations of a lying-in-hospital.i partly surmise also, that this wicked charge against whalers may belikewise imputed to the existence on the coast of greenland, in formertimes, of a dutch village called schmerenburgh or smeerenberg, whichlatter name is the one used by the learned fogo von slack, in his greatwork on smells, a text-book on that subject. as its name imports (smeer,fat; berg, to put up), this village was founded in order to afford aplace for the blubber of the dutch whale fleet to be tried out, withoutbeing taken home to holland for that purpose. it was a collection offurnaces, fat-kettles, and oil sheds; and when the works were in fulloperation certainly gave forth no very pleasant savor. but all this isquite different with a south sea sperm whaler; which in a voyage of fouryears perhaps, after completely filling her hold with oil, does not,perhaps, consume fifty days in the business of boiling out; and in thestate that it is casked, the oil is nearly scentless. the truth is, thatliving or dead, if but decently treated, whales as a species are byno means creatures of ill odor; nor can whalemen be recognised, as thepeople of the middle ages affected to detect a jew in the company, bythe nose. nor indeed can the whale possibly be otherwise than fragrant,when, as a general thing, he enjoys such high health; taking abundanceof exercise; always out of doors; though, it is true, seldom in theopen air. i say, that the motion of a sperm whale's flukes above waterdispenses a perfume, as when a musk-scented lady rustles her dress in awarm parlor. what then shall i liken the sperm whale to for fragrance,considering his magnitude? must it not be to that famous elephant, withjewelled tusks, and redolent with myrrh, which was led out of an indiantown to do honour to alexander the great?chapter 93. the castaway.it was but some few days after encountering the frenchman, that a mostsignificant event befell the most insignificant of the pequod's crew;an event most lamentable; and which ended in providing the sometimesmadly merry and predestinated craft with a living and ever accompanyingprophecy of whatever shattered sequel might prove her own.now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats. somefew hands are reserved called ship-keepers, whose province it is to workthe vessel while the boats are pursuing the whale. as a general thing,these ship-keepers are as hardy fellows as the men comprising theboats' crews. but if there happen to be an unduly slender, clumsy,or timorous wight in the ship, that wight is certain to be made aship-keeper. it was so in the pequod with the little negro pippin bynick-name, pip by abbreviation. poor pip! ye have heard of himbefore; ye must remember his tambourine on that dramatic midnight, sogloomy-jolly.in outer aspect, pip and dough-boy made a match, like a black pony and awhite one, of equal developments, though of dissimilar colour, driven inone eccentric span. but while hapless dough-boy was by nature dull andtorpid in his intellects, pip, though over tender-hearted, was at bottomvery bright, with that pleasant, genial, jolly brightness peculiar tohis tribe; a tribe, which ever enjoy all holidays and festivitieswith finer, freer relish than any other race. for blacks, the year'scalendar should show naught but three hundred and sixty-five fourthof julys and new year's days. nor smile so, while i write that thislittle black was brilliant, for even blackness has its brilliancy;behold yon lustrous ebony, panelled in king's cabinets. but pip lovedlife, and all life's peaceable securities; so that the panic-strikingbusiness in which he had somehow unaccountably become entrapped, hadmost sadly blurred his brightness; though, as ere long will be seen,what was thus temporarily subdued in him, in the end was destined to beluridly illumined by strange wild fires, that fictitiously showed himoff to ten times the natural lustre with which in his native tollandcounty in connecticut, he had once enlivened many a fiddler's frolicon the green; and at melodious even-tide, with his gay ha-ha! had turnedthe round horizon into one star-belled tambourine. so, though in theclear air of day, suspended against a blue-veined neck, the pure-watereddiamond drop will healthful glow; yet, when the cunning jeweller wouldshow you the diamond in its most impressive lustre, he lays it againsta gloomy ground, and then lights it up, not by the sun, but by someunnatural gases. then come out those fiery effulgences, infernallysuperb; then the evil-blazing diamond, once the divinest symbol of thecrystal skies, looks like some crown-jewel stolen from the king of hell.but let us to the story.it came to pass, that in the ambergris affair stubb's after-oarsmanchanced so to sprain his hand, as for a time to become quite maimed;and, temporarily, pip was put into his place.the first time stubb lowered with him, pip evinced much nervousness;but happily, for that time, escaped close contact with the whale; andtherefore came off not altogether discreditably; though stubb observinghim, took care, afterwards, to exhort him to cherish his courageousnessto the utmost, for he might often find it needful.now upon the second lowering, the boat paddled upon the whale; and asthe fish received the darted iron, it gave its customary rap, whichhappened, in this instance, to be right under poor pip's seat. theinvoluntary consternation of the moment caused him to leap, paddle inhand, out of the boat; and in such a way, that part of the slack whaleline coming against his chest, he breasted it overboard with him, so asto become entangled in it, when at last plumping into the water. thatinstant the stricken whale started on a fierce run, the line swiftlystraightened; and presto! poor pip came all foaming up to the chocksof the boat, remorselessly dragged there by the line, which had takenseveral turns around his chest and neck.tashtego stood in the bows. he was full of the fire of the hunt. hehated pip for a poltroon. snatching the boat-knife from its sheath,he suspended its sharp edge over the line, and turning towards stubb,exclaimed interrogatively, "cut?" meantime pip's blue, choked faceplainly looked, do, for god's sake! all passed in a flash. in lessthan half a minute, this entire thing happened."damn him, cut!" roared stubb; and so the whale was lost and pip wassaved.so soon as he recovered himself, the poor little negro was assailedby yells and execrations from the crew. tranquilly permitting theseirregular cursings to evaporate, stubb then in a plain, business-like,but still half humorous manner, cursed pip officially; and that done,unofficially gave him much wholesome advice. the substance was, neverjump from a boat, pip, except_but all the rest was indefinite, as thesoundest advice ever is. now, in general, stick to the boat, is yourtrue motto in whaling; but cases will sometimes happen when leap fromthe boat, is still better. moreover, as if perceiving at last that if heshould give undiluted conscientious advice to pip, he would be leavinghim too wide a margin to jump in for the future; stubb suddenly droppedall advice, and concluded with a peremptory command, "stick to theboat, pip, or by the lord, i won't pick you up if you jump; mind that.we can't afford to lose whales by the likes of you; a whale would sellfor thirty times what you would, pip, in alabama. bear that in mind, anddon't jump any more." hereby perhaps stubb indirectly hinted, thatthough man loved his fellow, yet man is a money-making animal, whichpropensity too often interferes with his benevolence.but we are all in the hands of the gods; and pip jumped again. it wasunder very similar circumstances to the first performance; but this timehe did not breast out the line; and hence, when the whale started torun, pip was left behind on the sea, like a hurried traveller's trunk.alas! stubb was but too true to his word. it was a beautiful, bounteous,blue day; the spangled sea calm and cool, and flatly stretching away,all round, to the horizon, like gold-beater's skin hammered out tothe extremest. bobbing up and down in that sea, pip's ebon head showedlike a head of cloves. no boat-knife was lifted when he fell so rapidlyastern. stubb's inexorable back was turned upon him; and the whale waswinged. in three minutes, a whole mile of shoreless ocean was betweenpip and stubb. out from the centre of the sea, poor pip turned hiscrisp, curling, black head to the sun, another lonely castaway, thoughthe loftiest and the brightest.now, in calm weather, to swim in the open ocean is as easy to thepractised swimmer as to ride in a spring-carriage ashore. but the awfullonesomeness is intolerable. the intense concentration of self in themiddle of such a heartless immensity, my god! who can tell it? mark,how when sailors in a dead calm bathe in the open sea_mark how closelythey hug their ship and only coast along her sides.but had stubb really abandoned the poor little negro to his fate? no; hedid not mean to, at least. because there were two boats in his wake,and he supposed, no doubt, that they would of course come up to pip veryquickly, and pick him up; though, indeed, such considerations towardsoarsmen jeopardized through their own timidity, is not always manifestedby the hunters in all similar instances; and such instances notunfrequently occur; almost invariably in the fishery, a coward, socalled, is marked with the same ruthless detestation peculiar tomilitary navies and armies.but it so happened, that those boats, without seeing pip, suddenlyspying whales close to them on one side, turned, and gave chase; andstubb's boat was now so far away, and he and all his crew so intentupon his fish, that pip's ringed horizon began to expand around himmiserably. by the merest chance the ship itself at last rescued him; butfrom that hour the little negro went about the deck an idiot; such, atleast, they said he was. the sea had jeeringly kept his finite bodyup, but drowned the infinite of his soul. not drowned entirely, though.rather carried down alive to wondrous depths, where strange shapes ofthe unwarped primal world glided to and fro before his passive eyes;and the miser-merman, wisdom, revealed his hoarded heaps; and among thejoyous, heartless, ever-juvenile eternities, pip saw the multitudinous,god-omnipresent, coral insects, that out of the firmament of watersheaved the colossal orbs. he saw god's foot upon the treadle of theloom, and spoke it; and therefore his shipmates called him mad. soman's insanity is heaven's sense; and wandering from all mortalreason, man comes at last to that celestial thought, which, to reason,is absurd and frantic; and weal or woe, feels then uncompromised,indifferent as his god.for the rest, blame not stubb too hardly. the thing is common in thatfishery; and in the sequel of the narrative, it will then be seen whatlike abandonment befell myself.chapter 94. a squeeze of the hand.that whale of stubb's, so dearly purchased, was duly brought tothe pequod's side, where all those cutting and hoisting operationspreviously detailed, were regularly gone through, even to the baling ofthe heidelburgh tun, or case.while some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employedin dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; andwhen the proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulatedere going to the try-works, of which anon.it had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with severalothers, i sat down before a large constantine's bath of it, i foundit strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about in theliquid part. it was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid.a sweet and unctuous duty! no wonder that in old times this sperm wassuch a favourite cosmetic. such a clearer! such a sweetener! such asoftener! such a delicious molifier! after having my hands in it foronly a few minutes, my fingers felt like eels, and began, as it were, toserpentine and spiralise.as i sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitterexertion at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship underindolent sail, and gliding so serenely along; as i bathed my hands amongthose soft, gentle globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost withinthe hour; as they richly broke to my fingers, and discharged all theiropulence, like fully ripe grapes their wine; as i snuffed up thatuncontaminated aroma,_literally and truly, like the smell of springviolets; i declare to you, that for the time i lived as in a muskymeadow; i forgot all about our horrible oath; in that inexpressiblesperm, i washed my hands and my heart of it; i almost began to creditthe old paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in allayingthe heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, i felt divinely free fromall ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort whatsoever.squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; i squeezed that spermtill i myself almost melted into it; i squeezed that sperm till astrange sort of insanity came over me; and i found myself unwittinglysqueezing my co-laborers' hands in it, mistaking their hands forthe gentle globules. such an abounding, affectionate, friendly, lovingfeeling did this avocation beget; that at last i was continuallysqueezing their hands, and looking up into their eyes sentimentally;as much as to say,_oh! my dear fellow beings, why should we longercherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-humor or envy!come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze ourselvesinto each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very milkand sperm of kindness.would that i could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! for now, since bymany prolonged, repeated experiences, i have perceived that in all casesman must eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of attainablefelicity; not placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy; but inthe wife, the heart, the bed, the table, the saddle, the fireside, thecountry; now that i have perceived all this, i am ready to squeeze caseeternally. in thoughts of the visions of the night, i saw long rows ofangels in paradise, each with his hands in a jar of spermaceti.now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other thingsakin to it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for thetry-works.first comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the taperingpart of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. itis tough with congealed tendons_a wad of muscle_but still containssome oil. after being severed from the whale, the white-horse is firstcut into portable oblongs ere going to the mincer. they look much likeblocks of berkshire marble.plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of thewhale's flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, andoften participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. it isa most refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. as its nameimports, it is of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreakedsnowy and golden ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson andpurple. it is plums of rubies, in pictures of citron. spite of reason,it is hard to keep yourself from eating it. i confess, that once i stolebehind the foremast to try it. it tasted something as i should conceivea royal cutlet from the thigh of louis le gros might have tasted,supposing him to have been killed the first day after the venisonseason, and that particular venison season contemporary with anunusually fine vintage of the vineyards of champagne.there is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up inthe course of this business, but which i feel it to be very puzzlingadequately to describe. it is called slobgollion; an appellationoriginal with the whalemen, and even so is the nature of the substance.it is an ineffably oozy, stringy affair, most frequently found in thetubs of sperm, after a prolonged squeezing, and subsequent decanting.i hold it to be the wondrously thin, ruptured membranes of the case,coalescing.gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, butsometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. it designates thedark, glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the greenlandor right whale, and much of which covers the decks of those inferiorsouls who hunt that ignoble leviathan.nippers. strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale'svocabulary. but as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. a whaleman'snipper is a short firm strip of tendinous stuff cut from the taperingpart of leviathan's tail: it averages an inch in thickness, and forthe rest, is about the size of the iron part of a hoe. edgewise movedalong the oily deck, it operates like a leathern squilgee; andby nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it allimpurities.but to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at onceto descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its inmates.this place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for theblanket-pieces, when stript and hoisted from the whale. when the propertime arrives for cutting up its contents, this apartment is a scene ofterror to all tyros, especially by night. on one side, lit by a dulllantern, a space has been left clear for the workmen. they generallygo in pairs,_a pike-and-gaffman and a spade-man. the whaling-pike issimilar to a frigate's boarding-weapon of the same name. the gaff issomething like a boat-hook. with his gaff, the gaffman hooks on to asheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from slipping, as the shippitches and lurches about. meanwhile, the spade-man stands on the sheetitself, perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces. thisspade is sharp as hone can make it; the spademan's feet are shoeless;the thing he stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away fromhim, like a sledge. if he cuts off one of his own toes, or one of hisassistants', would you be very much astonished? toes are scarce amongveteran blubber-room men.chapter 95. the cassock.had you stepped on board the pequod at a certain juncture of thispost-mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh thewindlass, pretty sure am i that you would have scanned with no smallcuriosity a very strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seenthere, lying along lengthwise in the lee scuppers. not the wondrouscistern in the whale's huge head; not the prodigy of his unhingedlower jaw; not the miracle of his symmetrical tail; none of these wouldso surprise you, as half a glimpse of that unaccountable cone,_longerthan a kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in diameter at the base, andjet-black as yojo, the ebony idol of queequeg. and an idol, indeed, itis; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. such an idol asthat found in the secret groves of queen maachah in judea; and forworshipping which, king asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed theidol, and burnt it for an abomination at the brook kedron, as darkly setforth in the 15th chapter of the first book of kings.look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and assistedby two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners call it,and with bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a grenadiercarrying a dead comrade from the field. extending it upon the forecastledeck, he now proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt, as anafrican hunter the pelt of a boa. this done he turns the pelt insideout, like a pantaloon leg; gives it a good stretching, so as almost todouble its diameter; and at last hangs it, well spread, in the rigging,to dry. ere long, it is taken down; when removing some three feet of it,towards the pointed extremity, and then cutting two slits for arm-holesat the other end, he lengthwise slips himself bodily into it. the mincernow stands before you invested in the full canonicals of his calling.immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone will adequatelyprotect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his office.that office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for thepots; an operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse, plantedendwise against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath it, intowhich the minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt orator'sdesk. arrayed in decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit; intenton bible leaves; what a candidate for an archbishopric, what a lad for apope were this mincer!**bible leaves! bible leaves! this is the invariable cry from the matesto the mincer. it enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into asthin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business ofboiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerablyincreased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.chapter 96. the try-works.besides her hoisted boats, an american whaler is outwardly distinguishedby her try-works. she presents the curious anomaly of the most solidmasonry joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship.it is as if from the open field a brick-kiln were transported to herplanks.the try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the mostroomy part of the deck. the timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength,fitted to sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick andmortar, some ten feet by eight square, and five in height. thefoundation does not penetrate the deck, but the masonry is firmlysecured to the surface by ponderous knees of iron bracing it on allsides, and screwing it down to the timbers. on the flanks it is casedwith wood, and at top completely covered by a large, sloping, battenedhatchway. removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots, two innumber, and each of several barrels' capacity. when not in use, theyare kept remarkably clean. sometimes they are polished with soapstoneand sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. during thenight-watches some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coilthemselves away there for a nap. while employed in polishing them_oneman in each pot, side by side_many confidential communicationsare carried on, over the iron lips. it is a place also for profoundmathematical meditation. it was in the left hand try-pot of the pequod,with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that i was firstindirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all bodiesgliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend fromany point in precisely the same time.removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the baremasonry of that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths ofthe furnaces, directly underneath the pots. these mouths are fittedwith heavy doors of iron. the intense heat of the fire is preventedfrom communicating itself to the deck, by means of a shallow reservoirextending under the entire inclosed surface of the works. by a tunnelinserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept replenished with water asfast as it evaporates. there are no external chimneys; they open directfrom the rear wall. and here let us go back for a moment.it was about nine o'clock at night that the pequod's try-works werefirst started on this present voyage. it belonged to stubb to overseethe business."all ready there? off hatch, then, and start her. you cook, fire theworks." this was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrustinghis shavings into the furnace throughout the passage. here be it saidthat in a whaling voyage the first fire in the try-works has to be fedfor a time with wood. after that no wood is used, except as a means ofquick ignition to the staple fuel. in a word, after being tried out, thecrisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps or fritters, still containsconsiderable of its unctuous properties. these fritters feed the flames.like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming misanthrope, onceignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by his own body.would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is horrible toinhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you must live init for the time. it has an unspeakable, wild, hindoo odor about it, suchas may lurk in the vicinity of funereal pyres. it smells like the leftwing of the day of judgment; it is an argument for the pit.by midnight the works were in full operation. we were clear from thecarcase; sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild oceandarkness was intense. but that darkness was licked up by the fierceflames, which at intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, andilluminated every lofty rope in the rigging, as with the famed greekfire. the burning ship drove on, as if remorselessly commissioned tosome vengeful deed. so the pitch and sulphur-freighted brigs of thebold hydriote, canaris, issuing from their midnight harbors, with broadsheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the turkish frigates, andfolded them in conflagrations.the hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide hearthin front of them. standing on this were the tartarean shapes of thepagan harpooneers, always the whale-ship's stokers. with huge prongedpoles they pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding pots, orstirred up the fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted, curling, outof the doors to catch them by the feet. the smoke rolled away in sullenheaps. to every pitch of the ship there was a pitch of the boiling oil,which seemed all eagerness to leap into their faces. opposite the mouthof the works, on the further side of the wide wooden hearth, was thewindlass. this served for a sea-sofa. here lounged the watch, when nototherwise employed, looking into the red heat of the fire, till theireyes felt scorched in their heads. their tawny features, now allbegrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards, and the contrastingbarbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely revealed inthe capricious emblazonings of the works. as they narrated to each othertheir unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of mirth;as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like theflames from the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the harpooneerswildly gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and dippers; as thewind howled on, and the sea leaped, and the ship groaned and dived, andyet steadfastly shot her red hell further and further into the blacknessof the sea and the night, and scornfully champed the white bone inher mouth, and viciously spat round her on all sides; then the rushingpequod, freighted with savages, and laden with fire, and burninga corpse, and plunging into that blackness of darkness, seemed thematerial counterpart of her monomaniac commander's soul.so seemed it to me, as i stood at her helm, and for long hours silentlyguided the way of this fire-ship on the sea. wrapped, for that interval,in darkness myself, i but the better saw the redness, the madness, theghastliness of others. the continual sight of the fiend shapes beforeme, capering half in smoke and half in fire, these at last begat kindredvisions in my soul, so soon as i began to yield to that unaccountabledrowsiness which ever would come over me at a midnight helm.but that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable)thing occurred to me. starting from a brief standing sleep, i washorribly conscious of something fatally wrong. the jaw-bone tiller smotemy side, which leaned against it; in my ears was the low hum of sails,just beginning to shake in the wind; i thought my eyes were open; iwas half conscious of putting my fingers to the lids and mechanicallystretching them still further apart. but, spite of all this, i could seeno compass before me to steer by; though it seemed but a minute since ihad been watching the card, by the steady binnacle lamp illuminating it.nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and then made ghastly byflashes of redness. uppermost was the impression, that whatever swift,rushing thing i stood on was not so much bound to any haven ahead asrushing from all havens astern. a stark, bewildered feeling, as ofdeath, came over me. convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but withthe crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way,inverted. my god! what is the matter with me? thought i. lo! in my briefsleep i had turned myself about, and was fronting the ship's stern,with my back to her prow and the compass. in an instant i faced back,just in time to prevent the vessel from flying up into the wind, andvery probably capsizing her. how glad and how grateful the relief fromthis unnatural hallucination of the night, and the fatal contingency ofbeing brought by the lee!look not too long in the face of the fire, o man! never dream with thyhand on the helm! turn not thy back to the compass; accept the firsthint of the hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when itsredness makes all things look ghastly. to-morrow, in the natural sun,the skies will be bright; those who glared like devils in the forkingflames, the morn will show in far other, at least gentler, relief; theglorious, golden, glad sun, the only true lamp_all others but liars!nevertheless the sun hides not virginia's dismal swamp, nor rome'saccursed campagna, nor wide sahara, nor all the millions of miles ofdeserts and of griefs beneath the moon. the sun hides not the ocean,which is the dark side of this earth, and which is two thirds of thisearth. so, therefore, that mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrowin him, that mortal man cannot be true_not true, or undeveloped. withbooks the same. the truest of all men was the man of sorrows, andthe truest of all books is solomon's, and ecclesiastes is the finehammered steel of woe. "all is vanity." all. this wilful world hathnot got hold of unchristian solomon's wisdom yet. but he who dodgeshospitals and jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and wouldrather talk of operas than hell; calls cowper, young, pascal, rousseau,poor devils all of sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swearsby rabelais as passing wise, and therefore jolly;_not that man isfitted to sit down on tomb-stones, and break the green damp mould withunfathomably wondrous solomon.but even solomon, he says, "the man that wandereth out of the wayof understanding shall remain" (i.e., even while living) "in thecongregation of the dead." give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest itinvert thee, deaden thee; as for the time it did me. there is a wisdomthat is woe; but there is a woe that is madness. and there is a catskilleagle in some souls that can alike dive down into the blackest gorges,and soar out of them again and become invisible in the sunny spaces.and even if he for ever flies within the gorge, that gorge is in themountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the mountain eagle is stillhigher than other birds upon the plain, even though they soar.chapter 97. the lamp.had you descended from the pequod's try-works to the pequod'sforecastle, where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one singlemoment you would have almost thought you were standing in someilluminated shrine of canonized kings and counsellors. there they layin their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner a chiselled muteness; ascore of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.in merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk ofqueens. to dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble indarkness to his pallet, this is his usual lot. but the whaleman, as heseeks the food of light, so he lives in light. he makes his berth analaddin's lamp, and lays him down in it; so that in the pitchiestnight the ship's black hull still houses an illumination.see with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful oflamps_often but old bottles and vials, though_to the copper coolerat the try-works, and replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat.he burns, too, the purest of oil, in its unmanufactured, and,therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown to solar, lunar, or astralcontrivances ashore. it is sweet as early grass butter in april. hegoes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its freshness andgenuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his ownsupper of game.chapter 98. stowing down and clearing up.already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar offdescried from the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors, andslaughtered in the valleys of the deep; how he is then towed alongsideand beheaded; and how (on the principle which entitled the headsman ofold to the garments in which the beheaded was killed) his great paddedsurtout becomes the property of his executioner; how, in due time, heis condemned to the pots, and, like shadrach, meshach, and abednego, hisspermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed through the fire;_but now itremains to conclude the last chapter of this part of the description byrehearsing_singing, if i may_the romantic proceeding of decantingoff his oil into the casks and striking them down into the hold, whereonce again leviathan returns to his native profundities, sliding alongbeneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.while still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into thesix-barrel casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rollingthis way and that in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewedround and headed over, end for end, and sometimes perilously scootacross the slippery deck, like so many land slides, till at lastman-handled and stayed in their course; and all round the hoops, rap,rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now, ex officio,every sailor is a cooper.at length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the greathatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open, and downgo the casks to their final rest in the sea. this done, the hatches arereplaced, and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.in the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkableincidents in all the business of whaling. one day the planks stream withfreshets of blood and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous masses ofthe whale's head are profanely piled; great rusty casks lie about,as in a brewery yard; the smoke from the try-works has besooted all thebulwarks; the mariners go about suffused with unctuousness; the entireship seems great leviathan himself; while on all hands the din isdeafening.but a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in thisself-same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works,you would all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with amost scrupulously neat commander. the unmanufactured sperm oil possessesa singularly cleansing virtue. this is the reason why the decks neverlook so white as just after what they call an affair of oil. besides,from the ashes of the burned scraps of the whale, a potent lye isreadily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from the back of the whaleremains clinging to the side, that lye quickly exterminates it. handsgo diligently along the bulwarks, and with buckets of water and ragsrestore them to their full tidiness. the soot is brushed from the lowerrigging. all the numerous implements which have been in use are likewisefaithfully cleansed and put away. the great hatch is scrubbed and placedupon the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out ofsight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the combinedand simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship's company, thewhole of this conscientious duty is at last concluded, then the crewthemselves proceed to their own ablutions; shift themselves from top totoe; and finally issue to the immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, asbridegrooms new-leaped from out the daintiest holland.now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, andhumorously discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics;propose to mat the deck; think of having hanging to the top; object notto taking tea by moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. to hint tosuch musked mariners of oil, and bone, and blubber, were little shortof audacity. they know not the thing you distantly allude to. away, andbring us napkins!but mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intenton spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will againsoil the old oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spotsomewhere. yes; and many is the time, when, after the severestuninterrupted labors, which know no night; continuing straight throughfor ninety-six hours; when from the boat, where they have swelled theirwrists with all day rowing on the line,_they only step to the deck tocarry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and cut and slash, yea,and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew by the combinedfires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works; when, on theheel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves to cleanse theship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the time the poorfellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks, are startledby the cry of "there she blows!" and away they fly to fight anotherwhale, and go through the whole weary thing again. oh! my friends, butthis is man-killing! yet this is life. for hardly have we mortals bylong toilings extracted from this world's vast bulk its small butvaluable sperm; and then, with weary patience, cleansed ourselves fromits defilements, and learned to live here in clean tabernacles ofthe soul; hardly is this done, when_there she blows!_the ghost isspouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go throughyoung life's old routine again.oh! the metempsychosis! oh! pythagoras, that in bright greece, twothousand years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; i sailed withthee along the peruvian coast last voyage_and, foolish as i am, taughtthee, a green simple boy, how to splice a rope!chapter 99. the doubloon.ere now it has been related how ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck,taking regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; butin the multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not beenadded how that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood,he was wont to pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangelyeyeing the particular object before him. when he halted before thebinnacle, with his glance fastened on the pointed needle in the compass,that glance shot like a javelin with the pointed intensity of hispurpose; and when resuming his walk he again paused before the mainmast,then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the riveted gold cointhere, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness, only dashedwith a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.but one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newlyattracted by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, asthough now for the first time beginning to interpret for himself insome monomaniac way whatever significance might lurk in them. and somecertain significance lurks in all things, else all things are littleworth, and the round world itself but an empty cipher, except to sell bythe cartload, as they do hills about boston, to fill up some morass inthe milky way.now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of theheart of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands, thehead-waters of many a pactolus flows. and though now nailed amidst allthe rustiness of iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes, yet,untouchable and immaculate to any foulness, it still preserved its quitoglow. nor, though placed amongst a ruthless crew and every hour passedby ruthless hands, and through the livelong nights shrouded with thickdarkness which might cover any pilfering approach, nevertheless everysunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left it last. for it wasset apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and however wantonin their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as the whitewhale's talisman. sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch bynight, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he would everlive to spend it.now those noble golden coins of south america are as medals of the sunand tropic token-pieces. here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun'sdisks and stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving,are in luxuriant profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seemsalmost to derive an added preciousness and enhancing glories, by passingthrough those fancy mints, so spanishly poetic.it so chanced that the doubloon of the pequod was a most wealthy exampleof these things. on its round border it bore the letters, republica delecuador: quito. so this bright coin came from a country planted in themiddle of the world, and beneath the great equator, and named after it;and it had been cast midway up the andes, in the unwaning clime thatknows no autumn. zoned by those letters you saw the likeness of threeandes' summits; from one a flame; a tower on another; on the third acrowing cock; while arching over all was a segment of the partitionedzodiac, the signs all marked with their usual cabalistics, and thekeystone sun entering the equinoctial point at libra.before this equatorial coin, ahab, not unobserved by others, was nowpausing."there's something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, andall other grand and lofty things; look here,_three peaks as proud aslucifer. the firm tower, that is ahab; the volcano, that is ahab; thecourageous, the undaunted, and victorious fowl, that, too, is ahab; allare ahab; and this round gold is but the image of the rounder globe,which, like a magician's glass, to each and every man in turn butmirrors back his own mysterious self. great pains, small gains for thosewho ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself. methinks nowthis coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the signof storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out of aformer equinox at aries! from storm to storm! so be it, then. born inthroes, _tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! so beit, then! here's stout stuff for woe to work on. so be it, then.""no fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil's claws musthave left their mouldings there since yesterday," murmured starbuckto himself, leaning against the bulwarks. "the old man seems to readbelshazzar's awful writing. i have never marked the coin inspectingly.he goes below; let me read. a dark valley between three mighty,heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the trinity, in some faintearthly symbol. so in this vale of death, god girds us round; and overall our gloom, the sun of righteousness still shines a beacon and ahope. if we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil;but if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to cheer.yet, oh, the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we would fainsnatch some sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain! this coinspeaks wisely, mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. i will quit it,lest truth shake me falsely.""there now's the old mogul," soliloquized stubb by the try-works,"he's been twigging it; and there goes starbuck from the same,and both with faces which i should say might be somewhere within ninefathoms long. and all from looking at a piece of gold, which did i haveit now on negro hill or in corlaer's hook, i'd not look at it verylong ere spending it. humph! in my poor, insignificant opinion, i regardthis as queer. i have seen doubloons before now in my voyagings; yourdoubloons of old spain, your doubloons of peru, your doubloons of chili,your doubloons of bolivia, your doubloons of popayan; with plenty ofgold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter joes.what then should there be in this doubloon of the equator that is sokilling wonderful? by golconda! let me read it once. halloa! here'ssigns and wonders truly! that, now, is what old bowditch in his epitomecalls the zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. i'll getthe almanac and as i have heard devils can be raised with daboll'sarithmetic, i'll try my hand at raising a meaning out of these queercurvicues here with the massachusetts calendar. here's the book.let's see now. signs and wonders; and the sun, he's always among_em. hem, hem, hem; here they are_here they go_all alive:_aries,or the ram; taurus, or the bull and jimimi! here's gemini himself, orthe twins. well; the sun he wheels among _em. aye, here on the coinhe's just crossing the threshold between two of twelve sitting-roomsall in a ring. book! you lie there; the fact is, you books must knowyour places. you'll do to give us the bare words and facts, but wecome in to supply the thoughts. that's my small experience, so far asthe massachusetts calendar, and bowditch's navigator, and daboll'sarithmetic go. signs and wonders, eh? pity if there is nothing wonderfulin signs, and significant in wonders! there's a clue somewhere; waita bit; hist_hark! by jove, i have it! look you, doubloon, your zodiachere is the life of man in one round chapter; and now i'll read itoff, straight out of the book. come, almanack! to begin: there'saries, or the ram_lecherous dog, he begets us; then, taurus, or thebull_he bumps us the first thing; then gemini, or the twins_that is,virtue and vice; we try to reach virtue, when lo! comes cancer the crab,and drags us back; and here, going from virtue, leo, a roaring lion,lies in the path_he gives a few fierce bites and surly dabs with hispaw; we escape, and hail virgo, the virgin! that's our first love;we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes libra, or thescales_happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we are very sadabout that, lord! how we suddenly jump, as scorpio, or the scorpion,stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come thearrows all round; sagittarius, or the archer, is amusing himself. aswe pluck out the shafts, stand aside! here's the battering-ram,capricornus, or the goat; full tilt, he comes rushing, and headlongwe are tossed; when aquarius, or the water-bearer, pours out his wholedeluge and drowns us; and to wind up with pisces, or the fishes, wesleep. there's a sermon now, writ in high heaven, and the sun goesthrough it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and hearty.jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alowhere, does jolly stubb. oh, jolly's the word for aye! adieu, doubloon!but stop; here comes little king-post; dodge round the try-works, now,and let's hear what he'll have to say. there; he's before it;he'll out with something presently. so, so; he's beginning.""i see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoeverraises a certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. so, what'sall this staring been about? it is worth sixteen dollars, that's true;and at two cents the cigar, that's nine hundred and sixty cigars. iwon't smoke dirty pipes like stubb, but i like cigars, and here'snine hundred and sixty of them; so here goes flask aloft to spy _emout.""shall i call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has afoolish look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sortof wiseish look to it. but, avast; here comes our old manxman_the oldhearse-driver, he must have been, that is, before he took to the sea. heluffs up before the doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other sideof the mast; why, there's a horse-shoe nailed on that side; and nowhe's back again; what does that mean? hark! he's muttering_voicelike an old worn-out coffee-mill. prick ears, and listen!""if the white whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, whenthe sun stands in some one of these signs. i've studied signs, andknow their marks; they were taught me two score years ago, by theold witch in copenhagen. now, in what sign will the sun then be? thehorse-shoe sign; for there it is, right opposite the gold. and what'sthe horse-shoe sign? the lion is the horse-shoe sign_the roaring anddevouring lion. ship, old ship! my old head shakes to think of thee.""there's another rendering now; but still one text. all sorts of menin one kind of world, you see. dodge again! here comes queequeg_alltattooing_looks like the signs of the zodiac himself. what says thecannibal? as i live he's comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone;thinks the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels,i suppose, as the old women talk surgeon's astronomy in the backcountry. and by jove, he's found something there in the vicinity ofhis thigh_i guess it's sagittarius, or the archer. no: he don'tknow what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button offsome king's trowsers. but, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil,fedallah; tail coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of hispumps as usual. what does he say, with that look of his? ah, only makesa sign to the sign and bows himself; there is a sun on the coin_fireworshipper, depend upon it. ho! more and more. this way comes pip_poorboy! would he had died, or i; he's half horrible to me. he too hasbeen watching all of these interpreters_myself included_and looknow, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot face. stand away againand hear him. hark!""i look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.""upon my soul, he's been studying murray's grammar! improving hismind, poor fellow! but what's that he says now_hist!""i look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.""why, he's getting it by heart_hist! again.""i look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.""well, that's funny.""and i, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and i'm acrow, especially when i stand a'top of this pine tree here. caw! caw!caw! caw! caw! caw! ain't i a crow? and where's the scare-crow?there he stands; two bones stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and twomore poked into the sleeves of an old jacket.""wonder if he means me?_complimentary!_poor lad!_i could go hangmyself. any way, for the present, i'll quit pip's vicinity. i canstand the rest, for they have plain wits; but he's too crazy-witty formy sanity. so, so, i leave him muttering.""here's the ship's navel, this doubloon here, and they are allon fire to unscrew it. but, unscrew your navel, and what's theconsequence? then again, if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for whenaught's nailed to the mast it's a sign that things grow desperate.ha, ha! old ahab! the white whale; he'll nail ye! this is a pine tree.my father, in old tolland county, cut down a pine tree once, and found asilver ring grown over in it; some old darkey's wedding ring. how didit get there? and so they'll say in the resurrection, when they cometo fish up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it, with beddedoysters for the shaggy bark. oh, the gold! the precious, precious, gold!the green miser'll hoard ye soon! hish! hish! god goes _mong theworlds blackberrying. cook! ho, cook! and cook us! jenny! hey, hey, hey,hey, hey, jenny, jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!"chapter 100. leg and arm. the pequod, of nantucket, meets the samuelenderby, of london."ship, ahoy! hast seen the white whale?"so cried ahab, once more hailing a ship showing english colours, bearingdown under the stern. trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in hishoisted quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the strangercaptain, who was carelessly reclining in his own boat's bow. he wasa darkly-tanned, burly, good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty orthereabouts, dressed in a spacious roundabout, that hung round him infestoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty arm of this jacket streamedbehind him like the broidered arm of a hussar's surcoat."hast seen the white whale!""see you this?" and withdrawing it from the folds that had hiddenit, he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a woodenhead like a mallet."man my boat!" cried ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oarsnear him_"stand by to lower!"in less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and hiscrew were dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the stranger.but here a curious difficulty presented itself. in the excitement of themoment, ahab had forgotten that since the loss of his leg he had neveronce stepped on board of any vessel at sea but his own, and then it wasalways by an ingenious and very handy mechanical contrivance peculiar tothe pequod, and a thing not to be rigged and shipped in any othervessel at a moment's warning. now, it is no very easy matterfor anybody_except those who are almost hourly used to it, likewhalemen_to clamber up a ship's side from a boat on the open sea;for the great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks, andthen instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. so, deprivedof one leg, and the strange ship of course being altogether unsuppliedwith the kindly invention, ahab now found himself abjectly reduced to aclumsy landsman again; hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful heighthe could hardly hope to attain.it has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untowardcircumstance that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from hisluckless mishap, almost invariably irritated or exasperated ahab. andin the present instance, all this was heightened by the sight of thetwo officers of the strange ship, leaning over the side, by theperpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and swinging towards him apair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first they did not seemto bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a cripple touse their sea bannisters. but this awkwardness only lasted a minute,because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,cried out, "i see, i see!_avast heaving there! jump, boys, and swingover the cutting-tackle."as good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or twoprevious, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive curvedblubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end. thiswas quickly lowered to ahab, who at once comprehending it all, slid hissolitary thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting in thefluke of an anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then giving theword, held himself fast, and at the same time also helped to hoist hisown weight, by pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running parts ofthe tackle. soon he was carefully swung inside the high bulwarks, andgently landed upon the capstan head. with his ivory arm frankly thrustforth in welcome, the other captain advanced, and ahab, putting out hisivory leg, and crossing the ivory arm (like two sword-fish blades)cried out in his walrus way, "aye, aye, hearty! let us shake bonestogether!_an arm and a leg!_an arm that never can shrink, d'yesee; and a leg that never can run. where did'st thou see the whitewhale?_how long ago?""the white whale," said the englishman, pointing his ivory armtowards the east, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had beena telescope; "there i saw him, on the line, last season.""and he took that arm off, did he?" asked ahab, now sliding downfrom the capstan, and resting on the englishman's shoulder, as he didso."aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?""spin me the yarn," said ahab; "how was it?""it was the first time in my life that i ever cruised on the line,"began the englishman. "i was ignorant of the white whale at that time.well, one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boatfastened to one of them; a regular circus horse he was, too, that wentmilling and milling round so, that my boat's crew could only trimdish, by sitting all their sterns on the outer gunwale. presently upbreaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing great whale, with amilky-white head and hump, all crows' feet and wrinkles.""it was he, it was he!" cried ahab, suddenly letting out hissuspended breath."and harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.""aye, aye_they were mine_my irons," cried ahab,exultingly_"but on!""give me a chance, then," said the englishman, good-humoredly."well, this old great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runsall afoam into the pod, and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!"aye, i see!_wanted to part it; free the fast-fish_an oldtrick_i know him.""how it was exactly," continued the one-armed commander, "i donot know; but in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught theresomehow; but we didn't know it then; so that when we afterwards pulledon the line, bounce we came plump on to his hump! instead of the otherwhale's; that went off to windward, all fluking. seeing how mattersstood, and what a noble great whale it was_the noblest and biggesti ever saw, sir, in my life_i resolved to capture him, spite of theboiling rage he seemed to be in. and thinking the hap-hazard line wouldget loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw (for i have a devilof a boat's crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all this, i say,i jumped into my first mate's boat_mr. mounttop's here (by theway, captain_mounttop; mounttop_the captain);_as i was saying,i jumped into mounttop's boat, which, d'ye see, was gunwale andgunwale with mine, then; and snatching the first harpoon, let this oldgreat-grandfather have it. but, lord, look you, sir_hearts and soulsalive, man_the next instant, in a jiff, i was blind as a bat_botheyes out_all befogged and bedeadened with black foam_the whale'stail looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air, likea marble steeple. no use sterning all, then; but as i was groping atmidday, with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as i was groping, i say,after the second iron, to toss it overboard_down comes the tail like alima tower, cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and,flukes first, the white hump backed through the wreck, as though it wasall chips. we all struck out. to escape his terrible flailings, i seizedhold of my harpoon-pole sticking in him, and for a moment clung to thatlike a sucking fish. but a combing sea dashed me off, and at the sameinstant, the fish, taking one good dart forwards, went down like aflash; and the barb of that cursed second iron towing along near mecaught me here" (clapping his hand just below his shoulder); "yes,caught me just here, i say, and bore me down to hell's flames, i wasthinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good god, the barb riptits way along the flesh_clear along the whole length of my arm_cameout nigh my wrist, and up i floated;_and that gentleman there willtell you the rest (by the way, captain_dr. bunger, ship's surgeon:bunger, my lad,_the captain). now, bunger boy, spin your part of theyarn."the professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all thetime standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote hisgentlemanly rank on board. his face was an exceedingly round but soberone; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and patchedtrowsers; and had thus far been dividing his attention between amarlingspike he held in one hand, and a pill-box held in the other,occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbs of the twocrippled captains. but, at his superior's introduction of him toahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain'sbidding."it was a shocking bad wound," began the whale-surgeon; "and,taking my advice, captain boomer here, stood our old sammy_""samuel enderby is the name of my ship," interrupted the one-armedcaptain, addressing ahab; "go on, boy.""stood our old sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazinghot weather there on the line. but it was no use_i did all i could;sat up with him nights; was very severe with him in the matter ofdiet_""oh, very severe!" chimed in the patient himself; then suddenlyaltering his voice, "drinking hot rum toddies with me every night,till he couldn't see to put on the bandages; and sending me to bed,half seas over, about three o'clock in the morning. oh, ye stars!he sat up with me indeed, and was very severe in my diet. oh! a greatwatcher, and very dietetically severe, is dr. bunger. (bunger, you dog,laugh out! why don't ye? you know you're a precious jolly rascal.)but, heave ahead, boy, i'd rather be killed by you than kept alive byany other man.""my captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir"_saidthe imperturbable godly-looking bunger, slightly bowing to ahab_"isapt to be facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of thatsort. but i may as well say_en passant, as the french remark_that imyself_that is to say, jack bunger, late of the reverend clergy_am astrict total abstinence man; i never drink_""water!" cried the captain; "he never drinks it; it's a sort offits to him; fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on_goon with the arm story.""yes, i may as well," said the surgeon, coolly. "i was aboutobserving, sir, before captain boomer's facetious interruption, thatspite of my best and severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worseand worse; the truth was, sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeonever saw; more than two feet and several inches long. i measured it withthe lead line. in short, it grew black; i knew what was threatened, andoff it came. but i had no hand in shipping that ivory arm there;that thing is against all rule"_pointing at it with themarlingspike_"that is the captain's work, not mine; he ordered thecarpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the end, toknock some one's brains out with, i suppose, as he tried mine once.he flies into diabolical passions sometimes. do ye see this dent,sir"_removing his hat, and brushing aside his hair, and exposing abowl-like cavity in his skull, but which bore not the slightest scarrytrace, or any token of ever having been a wound_"well, the captainthere will tell you how that came here; he knows.""no, i don't," said the captain, "but his mother did; he wasborn with it. oh, you solemn rogue, you_you bunger! was there eversuch another bunger in the watery world? bunger, when you die, you oughtto die in pickle, you dog; you should be preserved to future ages, yourascal.""what became of the white whale?" now cried ahab, who thus far hadbeen impatiently listening to this by-play between the two englishmen."oh!" cried the one-armed captain, "oh, yes! well; after hesounded, we didn't see him again for some time; in fact, as i beforehinted, i didn't then know what whale it was that had served me such atrick, till some time afterwards, when coming back to the line, we heardabout moby dick_as some call him_and then i knew it was he.""did'st thou cross his wake again?""twice.""but could not fasten?""didn't want to try to: ain't one limb enough? what should i dowithout this other arm? and i'm thinking moby dick doesn't bite somuch as he swallows.""well, then," interrupted bunger, "give him your left arm forbait to get the right. do you know, gentlemen"_very gravely andmathematically bowing to each captain in succession_"do you know,gentlemen, that the digestive organs of the whale are so inscrutablyconstructed by divine providence, that it is quite impossible for him tocompletely digest even a man's arm? and he knows it too. so that whatyou take for the white whale's malice is only his awkwardness. forhe never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to terrify byfeints. but sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly apatient of mine in ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, onceupon a time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayedfor a twelvemonth or more; when i gave him an emetic, and he heaved itup in small tacks, d'ye see. no possible way for him to digest thatjack-knife, and fully incorporate it into his general bodily system.yes, captain boomer, if you are quick enough about it, and have a mindto pawn one arm for the sake of the privilege of giving decent burialto the other, why in that case the arm is yours; only let the whale haveanother chance at you shortly, that's all.""no, thank ye, bunger," said the english captain, "he's welcometo the arm he has, since i can't help it, and didn't know him then;but not to another one. no more white whales for me; i've loweredfor him once, and that has satisfied me. there would be great glory inkilling him, i know that; and there is a ship-load of precious spermin him, but, hark ye, he's best let alone; don't you think so,captain?"_glancing at the ivory leg."he is. but he will still be hunted, for all that. what is best letalone, that accursed thing is not always what least allures. he's alla magnet! how long since thou saw'st him last? which way heading?""bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend's," cried bunger,stoopingly walking round ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing;"this man's blood_bring the thermometer!_it's at the boilingpoint!_his pulse makes these planks beat!_sir!"_taking a lancetfrom his pocket, and drawing near to ahab's arm."avast!" roared ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks_"man theboat! which way heading?""good god!" cried the english captain, to whom the question was put."what's the matter? he was heading east, i think._is your captaincrazy?" whispering fedallah.but fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks totake the boat's steering oar, and ahab, swinging the cutting-tackletowards him, commanded the ship's sailors to stand by to lower.in a moment he was standing in the boat's stern, and the manilla menwere springing to their oars. in vain the english captain hailed him.with back to the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own,ahab stood upright till alongside of the pequod.chapter 101. the decanter.ere the english ship fades from sight, be it set down here, thatshe hailed from london, and was named after the late samuel enderby,merchant of that city, the original of the famous whaling house ofenderby _ sons; a house which in my poor whaleman's opinion, comes notfar behind the united royal houses of the tudors and bourbons, in pointof real historical interest. how long, prior to the year of ourlord 1775, this great whaling house was in existence, my numerousfish-documents do not make plain; but in that year (1775) it fittedout the first english ships that ever regularly hunted the sperm whale;though for some score of years previous (ever since 1726) our valiantcoffins and maceys of nantucket and the vineyard had in large fleetspursued that leviathan, but only in the north and south atlantic: notelsewhere. be it distinctly recorded here, that the nantucketers werethe first among mankind to harpoon with civilized steel the great spermwhale; and that for half a century they were the only people of thewhole globe who so harpooned him.in 1778, a fine ship, the amelia, fitted out for the express purpose,and at the sole charge of the vigorous enderbys, boldly rounded capehorn, and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat of anysort in the great south sea. the voyage was a skilful and lucky one;and returning to her berth with her hold full of the precious sperm,the amelia's example was soon followed by other ships, english andamerican, and thus the vast sperm whale grounds of the pacific werethrown open. but not content with this good deed, the indefatigablehouse again bestirred itself: samuel and all his sons_how many, theirmother only knows_and under their immediate auspices, and partly, ithink, at their expense, the british government was induced to send thesloop-of-war rattler on a whaling voyage of discovery into the southsea. commanded by a naval post-captain, the rattler made a rattlingvoyage of it, and did some service; how much does not appear. but thisis not all. in 1819, the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship oftheir own, to go on a tasting cruise to the remote waters of japan. thatship_well called the "syren"_made a noble experimental cruise;and it was thus that the great japanese whaling ground first becamegenerally known. the syren in this famous voyage was commanded by acaptain coffin, a nantucketer.all honour to the enderbies, therefore, whose house, i think, exists tothe present day; though doubtless the original samuel must long ago haveslipped his cable for the great south sea of the other world.the ship named after him was worthy of the honour, being a very fastsailer and a noble craft every way. i boarded her once at midnightsomewhere off the patagonian coast, and drank good flip down in theforecastle. it was a fine gam we had, and they were all trumps_everysoul on board. a short life to them, and a jolly death. and that finegam i had_long, very long after old ahab touched her planks with hisivory heel_it minds me of the noble, solid, saxon hospitality of thatship; and may my parson forget me, and the devil remember me, if i everlose sight of it. flip? did i say we had flip? yes, and we flipped it atthe rate of ten gallons the hour; and when the squall came (for it'ssqually off there by patagonia), and all hands_visitors and all_werecalled to reef topsails, we were so top-heavy that we had to swing eachother aloft in bowlines; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of ourjackets into the sails, so that we hung there, reefed fast in thehowling gale, a warning example to all drunken tars. however, the mastsdid not go overboard; and by and by we scrambled down, so sober, that wehad to pass the flip again, though the savage salt spray bursting downthe forecastle scuttle, rather too much diluted and pickled it to mytaste.the beef was fine_tough, but with body in it. they said it wasbull-beef; others, that it was dromedary beef; but i do not know, forcertain, how that was. they had dumplings too; small, but substantial,symmetrically globular, and indestructible dumplings. i fancied that youcould feel them, and roll them about in you after they were swallowed.if you stooped over too far forward, you risked their pitching out ofyou like billiard-balls. the bread_but that couldn't be helped;besides, it was an anti-scorbutic; in short, the bread contained theonly fresh fare they had. but the forecastle was not very light, and itwas very easy to step over into a dark corner when you ate it. but allin all, taking her from truck to helm, considering the dimensions ofthe cook's boilers, including his own live parchment boilers; foreand aft, i say, the samuel enderby was a jolly ship; of good fare andplenty; fine flip and strong; crack fellows all, and capital from bootheels to hat-band.but why was it, think ye, that the samuel enderby, and some otherenglish whalers i know of_not all though_were such famous,hospitable ships; that passed round the beef, and the bread, and thecan, and the joke; and were not soon weary of eating, and drinking, andlaughing? i will tell you. the abounding good cheer of these englishwhalers is matter for historical research. nor have i been at allsparing of historical whale research, when it has seemed needed.the english were preceded in the whale fishery by the hollanders,zealanders, and danes; from whom they derived many terms still extantin the fishery; and what is yet more, their fat old fashions,touching plenty to eat and drink. for, as a general thing, the englishmerchant-ship scrimps her crew; but not so the english whaler. hence, inthe english, this thing of whaling good cheer is not normal and natural,but incidental and particular; and, therefore, must have some specialorigin, which is here pointed out, and will be still further elucidated.during my researches in the leviathanic histories, i stumbled upon anancient dutch volume, which, by the musty whaling smell of it, i knewmust be about whalers. the title was, "dan coopman," wherefore iconcluded that this must be the invaluable memoirs of some amsterdamcooper in the fishery, as every whale ship must carry its cooper. i wasreinforced in this opinion by seeing that it was the production of one"fitz swackhammer." but my friend dr. snodhead, a very learned man,professor of low dutch and high german in the college of santa claus andst. pott's, to whom i handed the work for translation, giving him abox of sperm candles for his trouble_this same dr. snodhead, so soonas he spied the book, assured me that "dan coopman" did not mean"the cooper," but "the merchant." in short, this ancient andlearned low dutch book treated of the commerce of holland; and, amongother subjects, contained a very interesting account of its whalefishery. and in this chapter it was, headed, "smeer," or "fat,"that i found a long detailed list of the outfits for the larders andcellars of 180 sail of dutch whalemen; from which list, as translated bydr. snodhead, i transcribe the following:400,000 lbs. of beef. 60,000 lbs. friesland pork. 150,000 lbs. of stockfish. 550,000 lbs. of biscuit. 72,000 lbs. of soft bread. 2,800 firkinsof butter. 20,000 lbs. texel _ leyden cheese. 144,000 lbs. cheese(probably an inferior article). 550 ankers of geneva. 10,800 barrels ofbeer.most statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading; not so inthe present case, however, where the reader is flooded with whole pipes,barrels, quarts, and gills of good gin and good cheer.at the time, i devoted three days to the studious digesting of allthis beer, beef, and bread, during which many profound thoughts wereincidentally suggested to me, capable of a transcendental and platonicapplication; and, furthermore, i compiled supplementary tables of myown, touching the probable quantity of stock-fish, etc., consumed byevery low dutch harpooneer in that ancient greenland and spitzbergenwhale fishery. in the first place, the amount of butter, and texel andleyden cheese consumed, seems amazing. i impute it, though, to theirnaturally unctuous natures, being rendered still more unctuous by thenature of their vocation, and especially by their pursuing their gamein those frigid polar seas, on the very coasts of that esquimaux countrywhere the convivial natives pledge each other in bumpers of train oil.the quantity of beer, too, is very large, 10,800 barrels. now, as thosepolar fisheries could only be prosecuted in the short summer of thatclimate, so that the whole cruise of one of these dutch whalemen,including the short voyage to and from the spitzbergen sea, did not muchexceed three months, say, and reckoning 30 men to each of their fleetof 180 sail, we have 5,400 low dutch seamen in all; therefore, i say,we have precisely two barrels of beer per man, for a twelve weeks'allowance, exclusive of his fair proportion of that 550 ankers of gin.now, whether these gin and beer harpooneers, so fuddled as one mightfancy them to have been, were the right sort of men to stand up ina boat's head, and take good aim at flying whales; this would seemsomewhat improbable. yet they did aim at them, and hit them too. butthis was very far north, be it remembered, where beer agrees well withthe constitution; upon the equator, in our southern fishery, beer wouldbe apt to make the harpooneer sleepy at the mast-head and boozy in hisboat; and grievous loss might ensue to nantucket and new bedford.but no more; enough has been said to show that the old dutch whalersof two or three centuries ago were high livers; and that the englishwhalers have not neglected so excellent an example. for, say they, whencruising in an empty ship, if you can get nothing better out of theworld, get a good dinner out of it, at least. and this empties thedecanter.chapter 102. a bower in the arsacides.hitherto, in descriptively treating of the sperm whale, i have chieflydwelt upon the marvels of his outer aspect; or separately and in detailupon some few interior structural features. but to a large and thoroughsweeping comprehension of him, it behooves me now to unbutton him stillfurther, and untagging the points of his hose, unbuckling his garters,and casting loose the hooks and the eyes of the joints of his innermostbones, set him before you in his ultimatum; that is to say, in hisunconditional skeleton.but how now, ishmael? how is it, that you, a mere oarsman in thefishery, pretend to know aught about the subterranean parts of thewhale? did erudite stubb, mounted upon your capstan, deliver lectureson the anatomy of the cetacea; and by help of the windlass, hold up aspecimen rib for exhibition? explain thyself, ishmael. can you landa full-grown whale on your deck for examination, as a cook dishes aroast-pig? surely not. a veritable witness have you hitherto been,ishmael; but have a care how you seize the privilege of jonah alone;the privilege of discoursing upon the joists and beams; the rafters,ridge-pole, sleepers, and under-pinnings, making up the frame-work ofleviathan; and belike of the tallow-vats, dairy-rooms, butteries, andcheeseries in his bowels.i confess, that since jonah, few whalemen have penetrated very farbeneath the skin of the adult whale; nevertheless, i have been blessedwith an opportunity to dissect him in miniature. in a ship i belongedto, a small cub sperm whale was once bodily hoisted to the deck for hispoke or bag, to make sheaths for the barbs of the harpoons, and for theheads of the lances. think you i let that chance go, without using myboat-hatchet and jack-knife, and breaking the seal and reading all thecontents of that young cub?and as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in theirgigantic, full grown development, for that rare knowledge i am indebtedto my late royal friend tranquo, king of tranque, one of the arsacides.for being at tranque, years ago, when attached to the trading-ship deyof algiers, i was invited to spend part of the arsacidean holidays withthe lord of tranque, at his retired palm villa at pupella; a sea-sideglen not very far distant from what our sailors called bamboo-town, hiscapital.among many other fine qualities, my royal friend tranquo, being giftedwith a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu, had broughttogether in pupella whatever rare things the more ingenious of hispeople could invent; chiefly carved woods of wonderful devices,chiselled shells, inlaid spears, costly paddles, aromatic canoes;and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders, thewonder-freighted, tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores.chief among these latter was a great sperm whale, which, after anunusually long raging gale, had been found dead and stranded, with hishead against a cocoa-nut tree, whose plumage-like, tufted droopingsseemed his verdant jet. when the vast body had at last been stripped ofits fathom-deep enfoldings, and the bones become dust dry in the sun,then the skeleton was carefully transported up the pupella glen, where agrand temple of lordly palms now sheltered it.the ribs were hung with trophies; the vertebrae were carved witharsacidean annals, in strange hieroglyphics; in the skull, the priestskept up an unextinguished aromatic flame, so that the mystic headagain sent forth its vapoury spout; while, suspended from a bough, theterrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees, like the hair-hungsword that so affrighted damocles.it was a wondrous sight. the wood was green as mosses of the icyglen; the trees stood high and haughty, feeling their living sap; theindustrious earth beneath was as a weaver's loom, with a gorgeouscarpet on it, whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp and woof,and the living flowers the figures. all the trees, with all their ladenbranches; all the shrubs, and ferns, and grasses; the message-carryingair; all these unceasingly were active. through the lacings of theleaves, the great sun seemed a flying shuttle weaving the unweariedverdure. oh, busy weaver! unseen weaver!_pause!_one word!_whitherflows the fabric? what palace may it deck? wherefore all these ceaselesstoilings? speak, weaver!_stay thy hand!_but one single word withthee! nay_the shuttle flies_the figures float from forth the loom;the freshet-rushing carpet for ever slides away. the weaver-god, heweaves; and by that weaving is he deafened, that he hears no mortalvoice; and by that humming, we, too, who look on the loom are deafened;and only when we escape it shall we hear the thousand voices that speakthrough it. for even so it is in all material factories. the spokenwords that are inaudible among the flying spindles; those same wordsare plainly heard without the walls, bursting from the opened casements.thereby have villainies been detected. ah, mortal! then, be heedful; forso, in all this din of the great world's loom, thy subtlest thinkingsmay be overheard afar.now, amid the green, life-restless loom of that arsacidean wood, thegreat, white, worshipped skeleton lay lounging_a gigantic idler! yet,as the ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummed aroundhim, the mighty idler seemed the cunning weaver; himself all wovenover with the vines; every month assuming greener, fresher verdure; buthimself a skeleton. life folded death; death trellised life; the grimgod wived with youthful life, and begat him curly-headed glories.now, when with royal tranquo i visited this wondrous whale, and saw theskull an altar, and the artificial smoke ascending from where the realjet had issued, i marvelled that the king should regard a chapel asan object of vertu. he laughed. but more i marvelled that the priestsshould swear that smoky jet of his was genuine. to and fro i pacedbefore this skeleton_brushed the vines aside_broke through theribs_and with a ball of arsacidean twine, wandered, eddied long amidits many winding, shaded colonnades and arbours. but soon my line wasout; and following it back, i emerged from the opening where i entered.i saw no living thing within; naught was there but bones.cutting me a green measuring-rod, i once more dived within the skeleton.from their arrow-slit in the skull, the priests perceived me taking thealtitude of the final rib, "how now!" they shouted; "dar'st thoumeasure this our god! that's for us." "aye, priests_well, howlong do ye make him, then?" but hereupon a fierce contest rose amongthem, concerning feet and inches; they cracked each other's sconceswith their yard-sticks_the great skull echoed_and seizing that luckychance, i quickly concluded my own admeasurements.these admeasurements i now propose to set before you. but first, beit recorded, that, in this matter, i am not free to utter any fanciedmeasurement i please. because there are skeleton authorities you canrefer to, to test my accuracy. there is a leviathanic museum, they tellme, in hull, england, one of the whaling ports of that country, wherethey have some fine specimens of fin-backs and other whales. likewise, ihave heard that in the museum of manchester, in new hampshire, they havewhat the proprietors call "the only perfect specimen of a greenland orriver whale in the united states." moreover, at a place in yorkshire,england, burton constable by name, a certain sir clifford constable hasin his possession the skeleton of a sperm whale, but of moderate size,by no means of the full-grown magnitude of my friend king tranquo's.in both cases, the stranded whales to which these two skeletonsbelonged, were originally claimed by their proprietors upon similargrounds. king tranquo seizing his because he wanted it; and sirclifford, because he was lord of the seignories of those parts. sirclifford's whale has been articulated throughout; so that, like agreat chest of drawers, you can open and shut him, in all his bonycavities_spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan_and swing all dayupon his lower jaw. locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doors andshutters; and a footman will show round future visitors with a bunch ofkeys at his side. sir clifford thinks of charging twopence for a peep atthe whispering gallery in the spinal column; threepence to hear the echoin the hollow of his cerebellum; and sixpence for the unrivalled viewfrom his forehead.the skeleton dimensions i shall now proceed to set down are copiedverbatim from my right arm, where i had them tattooed; as in my wildwanderings at that period, there was no other secure way of preservingsuch valuable statistics. but as i was crowded for space, and wishedthe other parts of my body to remain a blank page for a poem i was thencomposing_at least, what untattooed parts might remain_i did nottrouble myself with the odd inches; nor, indeed, should inches at allenter into a congenial admeasurement of the whale.chapter 103. measurement of the whale's skeleton.in the first place, i wish to lay before you a particular, plainstatement, touching the living bulk of this leviathan, whose skeleton weare briefly to exhibit. such a statement may prove useful here.according to a careful calculation i have made, and which i partly baseupon captain scoresby's estimate, of seventy tons for the largestsized greenland whale of sixty feet in length; according to my carefulcalculation, i say, a sperm whale of the largest magnitude, betweeneighty-five and ninety feet in length, and something less than fortyfeet in its fullest circumference, such a whale will weigh at leastninety tons; so that, reckoning thirteen men to a ton, he wouldconsiderably outweigh the combined population of a whole village of onethousand one hundred inhabitants.think you not then that brains, like yoked cattle, should be put to thisleviathan, to make him at all budge to any landsman's imagination?having already in various ways put before you his skull, spout-hole,jaw, teeth, tail, forehead, fins, and divers other parts, i shall nowsimply point out what is most interesting in the general bulk of hisunobstructed bones. but as the colossal skull embraces so very largea proportion of the entire extent of the skeleton; as it is by far themost complicated part; and as nothing is to be repeated concerning it inthis chapter, you must not fail to carry it in your mind, or under yourarm, as we proceed, otherwise you will not gain a complete notion of thegeneral structure we are about to view.in length, the sperm whale's skeleton at tranque measured seventy-twofeet; so that when fully invested and extended in life, he must havebeen ninety feet long; for in the whale, the skeleton loses about onefifth in length compared with the living body. of this seventy-two feet,his skull and jaw comprised some twenty feet, leaving some fifty feet ofplain back-bone. attached to this back-bone, for something less than athird of its length, was the mighty circular basket of ribs which onceenclosed his vitals.to me this vast ivory-ribbed chest, with the long, unrelieved spine,extending far away from it in a straight line, not a little resembledthe hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks, when only some twentyof her naked bow-ribs are inserted, and the keel is otherwise, for thetime, but a long, disconnected timber.the ribs were ten on a side. the first, to begin from the neck,was nearly six feet long; the second, third, and fourth were eachsuccessively longer, till you came to the climax of the fifth, or oneof the middle ribs, which measured eight feet and some inches. fromthat part, the remaining ribs diminished, till the tenth and last onlyspanned five feet and some inches. in general thickness, they all borea seemly correspondence to their length. the middle ribs were the mostarched. in some of the arsacides they are used for beams whereon to layfootpath bridges over small streams.in considering these ribs, i could not but be struck anew with thecircumstance, so variously repeated in this book, that the skeleton ofthe whale is by no means the mould of his invested form. the largest ofthe tranque ribs, one of the middle ones, occupied that part of the fishwhich, in life, is greatest in depth. now, the greatest depth of theinvested body of this particular whale must have been at least sixteenfeet; whereas, the corresponding rib measured but little more than eightfeet. so that this rib only conveyed half of the true notion of theliving magnitude of that part. besides, for some way, where i now sawbut a naked spine, all that had been once wrapped round with tons ofadded bulk in flesh, muscle, blood, and bowels. still more, for theample fins, i here saw but a few disordered joints; and in place of theweighty and majestic, but boneless flukes, an utter blank!how vain and foolish, then, thought i, for timid untravelled man to tryto comprehend aright this wondrous whale, by merely poring over his deadattenuated skeleton, stretched in this peaceful wood. no. only in theheart of quickest perils; only when within the eddyings of his angryflukes; only on the profound unbounded sea, can the fully invested whalebe truly and livingly found out.but the spine. for that, the best way we can consider it is, with acrane, to pile its bones high up on end. no speedy enterprise. but nowit's done, it looks much like pompey's pillar.there are forty and odd vertebrae in all, which in the skeleton arenot locked together. they mostly lie like the great knobbed blocks ona gothic spire, forming solid courses of heavy masonry. the largest,a middle one, is in width something less than three feet, and in depthmore than four. the smallest, where the spine tapers away into thetail, is only two inches in width, and looks something like a whitebilliard-ball. i was told that there were still smaller ones, but theyhad been lost by some little cannibal urchins, the priest's children,who had stolen them to play marbles with. thus we see how that thespine of even the hugest of living things tapers off at last into simplechild's play.chapter 104. the fossil whale.from his mighty bulk the whale affords a most congenial theme whereonto enlarge, amplify, and generally expatiate. would you, you could notcompress him. by good rights he should only be treated of in imperialfolio. not to tell over again his furlongs from spiracle to tail,and the yards he measures about the waist; only think of the giganticinvolutions of his intestines, where they lie in him like greatcables and hawsers coiled away in the subterranean orlop-deck of aline-of-battle-ship.since i have undertaken to manhandle this leviathan, it behooves meto approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the enterprise; notoverlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood, and spinning himout to the uttermost coil of his bowels. having already described himin most of his present habitatory and anatomical peculiarities, itnow remains to magnify him in an archaeological, fossiliferous, andantediluvian point of view. applied to any other creature than theleviathan_to an ant or a flea_such portly terms might justly bedeemed unwarrantably grandiloquent. but when leviathan is the text,the case is altered. fain am i to stagger to this emprise under theweightiest words of the dictionary. and here be it said, thatwhenever it has been convenient to consult one in the course of thesedissertations, i have invariably used a huge quarto edition ofjohnson, expressly purchased for that purpose; because that famouslexicographer's uncommon personal bulk more fitted him to compile alexicon to be used by a whale author like me.one often hears of writers that rise and swell with their subject,though it may seem but an ordinary one. how, then, with me, writingof this leviathan? unconsciously my chirography expands into placardcapitals. give me a condor's quill! give me vesuvius' crater foran inkstand! friends, hold my arms! for in the mere act of penning mythoughts of this leviathan, they weary me, and make me faint with theiroutreaching comprehensiveness of sweep, as if to include the wholecircle of the sciences, and all the generations of whales, and men, andmastodons, past, present, and to come, with all the revolving panoramasof empire on earth, and throughout the whole universe, not excluding itssuburbs. such, and so magnifying, is the virtue of a large and liberaltheme! we expand to its bulk. to produce a mighty book, you must choosea mighty theme. no great and enduring volume can ever be written on theflea, though many there be who have tried it.ere entering upon the subject of fossil whales, i present my credentialsas a geologist, by stating that in my miscellaneous time i have beena stone-mason, and also a great digger of ditches, canals and wells,wine-vaults, cellars, and cisterns of all sorts. likewise, by way ofpreliminary, i desire to remind the reader, that while in the earliergeological strata there are found the fossils of monsters now almostcompletely extinct; the subsequent relics discovered in what are calledthe tertiary formations seem the connecting, or at any rate interceptedlinks, between the antichronical creatures, and those whose remoteposterity are said to have entered the ark; all the fossil whaleshitherto discovered belong to the tertiary period, which is the lastpreceding the superficial formations. and though none of themprecisely answer to any known species of the present time, they are yetsufficiently akin to them in general respects, to justify their takingrank as cetacean fossils.detached broken fossils of pre-adamite whales, fragments of their bonesand skeletons, have within thirty years past, at various intervals, beenfound at the base of the alps, in lombardy, in france, in england, inscotland, and in the states of louisiana, mississippi, and alabama.among the more curious of such remains is part of a skull, which in theyear 1779 was disinterred in the rue dauphine in paris, a short streetopening almost directly upon the palace of the tuileries; and bonesdisinterred in excavating the great docks of antwerp, in napoleon'stime. cuvier pronounced these fragments to have belonged to some utterlyunknown leviathanic species.but by far the most wonderful of all cetacean relics was the almostcomplete vast skeleton of an extinct monster, found in the year 1842, onthe plantation of judge creagh, in alabama. the awe-stricken credulousslaves in the vicinity took it for the bones of one of the fallenangels. the alabama doctors declared it a huge reptile, and bestowedupon it the name of basilosaurus. but some specimen bones of it beingtaken across the sea to owen, the english anatomist, it turned outthat this alleged reptile was a whale, though of a departed species. asignificant illustration of the fact, again and again repeated in thisbook, that the skeleton of the whale furnishes but little clue to theshape of his fully invested body. so owen rechristened the monsterzeuglodon; and in his paper read before the london geological society,pronounced it, in substance, one of the most extraordinary creatureswhich the mutations of the globe have blotted out of existence.when i stand among these mighty leviathan skeletons, skulls, tusks,jaws, ribs, and vertebrae, all characterized by partial resemblances tothe existing breeds of sea-monsters; but at the same time bearing onthe other hand similar affinities to the annihilated antichronicalleviathans, their incalculable seniors; i am, by a flood, borne backto that wondrous period, ere time itself can be said to have begun; fortime began with man. here saturn's grey chaos rolls over me, and iobtain dim, shuddering glimpses into those polar eternities; when wedgedbastions of ice pressed hard upon what are now the tropics; and in allthe 25,000 miles of this world's circumference, not an inhabitablehand's breadth of land was visible. then the whole world was thewhale's; and, king of creation, he left his wake along the presentlines of the andes and the himmalehs. who can show a pedigree likeleviathan? ahab's harpoon had shed older blood than the pharaoh's.methuselah seems a school-boy. i look round to shake hands with shem.i am horror-struck at this antemosaic, unsourced existence of theunspeakable terrors of the whale, which, having been before all time,must needs exist after all humane ages are over.but not alone has this leviathan left his pre-adamite traces in thestereotype plates of nature, and in limestone and marl bequeathed hisancient bust; but upon egyptian tablets, whose antiquity seems to claimfor them an almost fossiliferous character, we find the unmistakableprint of his fin. in an apartment of the great temple of denderah,some fifty years ago, there was discovered upon the granite ceiling asculptured and painted planisphere, abounding in centaurs, griffins, anddolphins, similar to the grotesque figures on the celestial globe of themoderns. gliding among them, old leviathan swam as of yore; was thereswimming in that planisphere, centuries before solomon was cradled.nor must there be omitted another strange attestation of the antiquityof the whale, in his own osseous post-diluvian reality, as set down bythe venerable john leo, the old barbary traveller."not far from the sea-side, they have a temple, the rafters and beamsof which are made of whale-bones; for whales of a monstrous size areoftentimes cast up dead upon that shore. the common people imagine, thatby a secret power bestowed by god upon the temple, no whale can pass itwithout immediate death. but the truth of the matter is, that on eitherside of the temple, there are rocks that shoot two miles into the sea,and wound the whales when they light upon _em. they keep a whale'srib of an incredible length for a miracle, which lying upon the groundwith its convex part uppermost, makes an arch, the head of which cannotbe reached by a man upon a camel's back. this rib (says john leo)is said to have layn there a hundred years before i saw it. theirhistorians affirm, that a prophet who prophesy'd of mahomet, came fromthis temple, and some do not stand to assert, that the prophet jonas wascast forth by the whale at the base of the temple."in this afric temple of the whale i leave you, reader, and if you be anantucketer, and a whaleman, you will silently worship there.chapter 105. does the whale's magnitude diminish?_will he perish?inasmuch, then, as this leviathan comes floundering down upon us fromthe head-waters of the eternities, it may be fitly inquired, whether,in the long course of his generations, he has not degenerated from theoriginal bulk of his sires.but upon investigation we find, that not only are the whales of thepresent day superior in magnitude to those whose fossil remains arefound in the tertiary system (embracing a distinct geological periodprior to man), but of the whales found in that tertiary system, thosebelonging to its latter formations exceed in size those of its earlierones.of all the pre-adamite whales yet exhumed, by far the largest is thealabama one mentioned in the last chapter, and that was less thanseventy feet in length in the skeleton. whereas, we have already seen,that the tape-measure gives seventy-two feet for the skeleton of a largesized modern whale. and i have heard, on whalemen's authority, thatsperm whales have been captured near a hundred feet long at the time ofcapture.but may it not be, that while the whales of the present hour are anadvance in magnitude upon those of all previous geological periods; mayit not be, that since adam's time they have degenerated?assuredly, we must conclude so, if we are to credit the accounts of suchgentlemen as pliny, and the ancient naturalists generally. for plinytells us of whales that embraced acres of living bulk, and aldrovandusof others which measured eight hundred feet in length_rope walks andthames tunnels of whales! and even in the days of banks and solander,cooke's naturalists, we find a danish member of the academy ofsciences setting down certain iceland whales (reydan-siskur, or wrinkledbellies) at one hundred and twenty yards; that is, three hundred andsixty feet. and lacepede, the french naturalist, in his elaboratehistory of whales, in the very beginning of his work (page 3), sets downthe right whale at one hundred metres, three hundred and twenty-eightfeet. and this work was published so late as a.d. 1825.but will any whaleman believe these stories? no. the whale of to-day isas big as his ancestors in pliny's time. and if ever i go where plinyis, i, a whaleman (more than he was), will make bold to tell him so.because i cannot understand how it is, that while the egyptian mummiesthat were buried thousands of years before even pliny was born, do notmeasure so much in their coffins as a modern kentuckian in his socks;and while the cattle and other animals sculptured on the oldest egyptianand nineveh tablets, by the relative proportions in which they aredrawn, just as plainly prove that the high-bred, stall-fed, prize cattleof smithfield, not only equal, but far exceed in magnitude the fattestof pharaoh's fat kine; in the face of all this, i will not admit thatof all animals the whale alone should have degenerated.but still another inquiry remains; one often agitated by the morerecondite nantucketers. whether owing to the almost omniscient look-outsat the mast-heads of the whaleships, now penetrating even throughbehring's straits, and into the remotest secret drawers and lockersof the world; and the thousand harpoons and lances darted along allcontinental coasts; the moot point is, whether leviathan can long endureso wide a chase, and so remorseless a havoc; whether he must not at lastbe exterminated from the waters, and the last whale, like the last man,smoke his last pipe, and then himself evaporate in the final puff.comparing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds of buffalo,which, not forty years ago, overspread by tens of thousands the prairiesof illinois and missouri, and shook their iron manes and scowled withtheir thunder-clotted brows upon the sites of populous river-capitals,where now the polite broker sells you land at a dollar an inch; in sucha comparison an irresistible argument would seem furnished, to show thatthe hunted whale cannot now escape speedy extinction.but you must look at this matter in every light. though so short aperiod ago_not a good lifetime_the census of the buffalo in illinoisexceeded the census of men now in london, and though at the present daynot one horn or hoof of them remains in all that region; and though thecause of this wondrous extermination was the spear of man; yet the fardifferent nature of the whale-hunt peremptorily forbids so inglorious anend to the leviathan. forty men in one ship hunting the sperm whales forforty-eight months think they have done extremely well, and thank god,if at last they carry home the oil of forty fish. whereas, in the daysof the old canadian and indian hunters and trappers of the west, whenthe far west (in whose sunset suns still rise) was a wilderness anda virgin, the same number of moccasined men, for the same number ofmonths, mounted on horse instead of sailing in ships, would have slainnot forty, but forty thousand and more buffaloes; a fact that, if needwere, could be statistically stated.nor, considered aright, does it seem any argument in favour of thegradual extinction of the sperm whale, for example, that in former years(the latter part of the last century, say) these leviathans, insmall pods, were encountered much oftener than at present, and, inconsequence, the voyages were not so prolonged, and were also much moreremunerative. because, as has been elsewhere noticed, those whales,influenced by some views to safety, now swim the seas in immensecaravans, so that to a large degree the scattered solitaries, yokes, andpods, and schools of other days are now aggregated into vast but widelyseparated, unfrequent armies. that is all. and equally fallacious seemsthe conceit, that because the so-called whale-bone whales no longerhaunt many grounds in former years abounding with them, hence thatspecies also is declining. for they are only being driven frompromontory to cape; and if one coast is no longer enlivened withtheir jets, then, be sure, some other and remoter strand has been veryrecently startled by the unfamiliar spectacle.furthermore: concerning these last mentioned leviathans, they have twofirm fortresses, which, in all human probability, will for ever remainimpregnable. and as upon the invasion of their valleys, the frosty swisshave retreated to their mountains; so, hunted from the savannas andglades of the middle seas, the whale-bone whales can at last resort totheir polar citadels, and diving under the ultimate glassy barriers andwalls there, come up among icy fields and floes; and in a charmed circleof everlasting december, bid defiance to all pursuit from man.but as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned for onecachalot, some philosophers of the forecastle have concluded that thispositive havoc has already very seriously diminished their battalions.but though for some time past a number of these whales, not lessthan 13,000, have been annually slain on the nor'-west coast by theamericans alone; yet there are considerations which render even thiscircumstance of little or no account as an opposing argument in thismatter.natural as it is to be somewhat incredulous concerning the populousnessof the more enormous creatures of the globe, yet what shall we say toharto, the historian of goa, when he tells us that at one hunting theking of siam took 4,000 elephants; that in those regions elephants arenumerous as droves of cattle in the temperate climes. and there seems noreason to doubt that if these elephants, which have now been hunted forthousands of years, by semiramis, by porus, by hannibal, and by all thesuccessive monarchs of the east_if they still survive there in greatnumbers, much more may the great whale outlast all hunting, since hehas a pasture to expatiate in, which is precisely twice as large as allasia, both americas, europe and africa, new holland, and all the islesof the sea combined.moreover: we are to consider, that from the presumed great longevityof whales, their probably attaining the age of a century and more,therefore at any one period of time, several distinct adult generationsmust be contemporary. and what that is, we may soon gain some ideaof, by imagining all the grave-yards, cemeteries, and family vaults ofcreation yielding up the live bodies of all the men, women, and childrenwho were alive seventy-five years ago; and adding this countless host tothe present human population of the globe.wherefore, for all these things, we account the whale immortal in hisspecies, however perishable in his individuality. he swam the seasbefore the continents broke water; he once swam over the site of thetuileries, and windsor castle, and the kremlin. in noah's flood hedespised noah's ark; and if ever the world is to be again flooded,like the netherlands, to kill off its rats, then the eternal whale willstill survive, and rearing upon the topmost crest of the equatorialflood, spout his frothed defiance to the skies.chapter 106. ahab's leg.the precipitating manner in which captain ahab had quitted the samuelenderby of london, had not been unattended with some small violence tohis own person. he had lighted with such energy upon a thwart of hisboat that his ivory leg had received a half-splintering shock. andwhen after gaining his own deck, and his own pivot-hole there, he sovehemently wheeled round with an urgent command to the steersman (itwas, as ever, something about his not steering inflexibly enough); then,the already shaken ivory received such an additional twist and wrench,that though it still remained entire, and to all appearances lusty, yetahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy.and, indeed, it seemed small matter for wonder, that for all hispervading, mad recklessness, ahab did at times give careful heed to thecondition of that dead bone upon which he partly stood. for it had notbeen very long prior to the pequod's sailing from nantucket, that hehad been found one night lying prone upon the ground, and insensible;by some unknown, and seemingly inexplicable, unimaginable casualty, hisivory limb having been so violently displaced, that it had stake-wisesmitten, and all but pierced his groin; nor was it without extremedifficulty that the agonizing wound was entirely cured.nor, at the time, had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind, that allthe anguish of that then present suffering was but the direct issue of aformer woe; and he too plainly seemed to see, that as the most poisonousreptile of the marsh perpetuates his kind as inevitably as the sweetestsongster of the grove; so, equally with every felicity, all miserableevents do naturally beget their like. yea, more than equally, thoughtahab; since both the ancestry and posterity of grief go further than theancestry and posterity of joy. for, not to hint of this: that it isan inference from certain canonic teachings, that while some naturalenjoyments here shall have no children born to them for the other world,but, on the contrary, shall be followed by the joy-childlessness ofall hell's despair; whereas, some guilty mortal miseries shall stillfertilely beget to themselves an eternally progressive progeny of griefsbeyond the grave; not at all to hint of this, there still seems aninequality in the deeper analysis of the thing. for, thought ahab, whileeven the highest earthly felicities ever have a certain unsignifyingpettiness lurking in them, but, at bottom, all heartwoes, a mysticsignificance, and, in some men, an archangelic grandeur; so do theirdiligent tracings-out not belie the obvious deduction. to trail thegenealogies of these high mortal miseries, carries us at last among thesourceless primogenitures of the gods; so that, in the face of all theglad, hay-making suns, and soft cymballing, round harvest-moons, we mustneeds give in to this: that the gods themselves are not for ever glad.the ineffaceable, sad birth-mark in the brow of man, is but the stamp ofsorrow in the signers.unwittingly here a secret has been divulged, which perhaps might moreproperly, in set way, have been disclosed before. with many otherparticulars concerning ahab, always had it remained a mystery to some,why it was, that for a certain period, both before and after the sailingof the pequod, he had hidden himself away with such grand-lama-likeexclusiveness; and, for that one interval, sought speechless refuge, asit were, among the marble senate of the dead. captain peleg's bruitedreason for this thing appeared by no means adequate; though, indeed,as touching all ahab's deeper part, every revelation partook more ofsignificant darkness than of explanatory light. but, in the end, it allcame out; this one matter did, at least. that direful mishap was atthe bottom of his temporary recluseness. and not only this, but to thatever-contracting, dropping circle ashore, who, for any reason, possessedthe privilege of a less banned approach to him; to that timid circle theabove hinted casualty_remaining, as it did, moodily unaccounted forby ahab_invested itself with terrors, not entirely underived from theland of spirits and of wails. so that, through their zeal for him, theyhad all conspired, so far as in them lay, to muffle up the knowledge ofthis thing from others; and hence it was, that not till a considerableinterval had elapsed, did it transpire upon the pequod's decks.but be all this as it may; let the unseen, ambiguous synod in the air,or the vindictive princes and potentates of fire, have to do or notwith earthly ahab, yet, in this present matter of his leg, he took plainpractical procedures;_he called the carpenter.and when that functionary appeared before him, he bade him without delayset about making a new leg, and directed the mates to see him suppliedwith all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory (sperm whale) which had thusfar been accumulated on the voyage, in order that a careful selectionof the stoutest, clearest-grained stuff might be secured. this done, thecarpenter received orders to have the leg completed that night; and toprovide all the fittings for it, independent of those pertaining to thedistrusted one in use. moreover, the ship's forge was ordered to behoisted out of its temporary idleness in the hold; and, to acceleratethe affair, the blacksmith was commanded to proceed at once to theforging of whatever iron contrivances might be needed.chapter 107. the carpenter.seat thyself sultanically among the moons of saturn, and take highabstracted man alone; and he seems a wonder, a grandeur, and a woe. butfrom the same point, take mankind in mass, and for the most part, theyseem a mob of unnecessary duplicates, both contemporary and hereditary.but most humble though he was, and far from furnishing an example ofthe high, humane abstraction; the pequod's carpenter was no duplicate;hence, he now comes in person on this stage.like all sea-going ship carpenters, and more especially those belongingto whaling vessels, he was, to a certain off-handed, practical extent,alike experienced in numerous trades and callings collateral to his own;the carpenter's pursuit being the ancient and outbranching trunk ofall those numerous handicrafts which more or less have to do with woodas an auxiliary material. but, besides the application to him of thegeneric remark above, this carpenter of the pequod was singularlyefficient in those thousand nameless mechanical emergencies continuallyrecurring in a large ship, upon a three or four years' voyage, inuncivilized and far-distant seas. for not to speak of his readiness inordinary duties:_repairing stove boats, sprung spars, reforming theshape of clumsy-bladed oars, inserting bull's eyes in the deck, ornew tree-nails in the side planks, and other miscellaneous mattersmore directly pertaining to his special business; he was moreoverunhesitatingly expert in all manner of conflicting aptitudes, bothuseful and capricious.the one grand stage where he enacted all his various parts so manifold,was his vice-bench; a long rude ponderous table furnished with severalvices, of different sizes, and both of iron and of wood. at all timesexcept when whales were alongside, this bench was securely lashedathwartships against the rear of the try-works.a belaying pin is found too large to be easily inserted into its hole:the carpenter claps it into one of his ever-ready vices, and straightwayfiles it smaller. a lost land-bird of strange plumage strays on board,and is made a captive: out of clean shaved rods of right-whale bone, andcross-beams of sperm whale ivory, the carpenter makes a pagoda-lookingcage for it. an oarsman sprains his wrist: the carpenter concocts asoothing lotion. stubb longed for vermillion stars to be painted uponthe blade of his every oar; screwing each oar in his big vice of wood,the carpenter symmetrically supplies the constellation. a sailor takesa fancy to wear shark-bone ear-rings: the carpenter drills his ears.another has the toothache: the carpenter out pincers, and clappingone hand upon his bench bids him be seated there; but the poor fellowunmanageably winces under the unconcluded operation; whirling round thehandle of his wooden vice, the carpenter signs him to clap his jaw inthat, if he would have him draw the tooth.thus, this carpenter was prepared at all points, and alike indifferentand without respect in all. teeth he accounted bits of ivory; heads hedeemed but top-blocks; men themselves he lightly held for capstans. butwhile now upon so wide a field thus variously accomplished and with suchliveliness of expertness in him, too; all this would seem to argue someuncommon vivacity of intelligence. but not precisely so. for nothing wasthis man more remarkable, than for a certain impersonal stolidity asit were; impersonal, i say; for it so shaded off into the surroundinginfinite of things, that it seemed one with the general stoliditydiscernible in the whole visible world; which while pauselessly activein uncounted modes, still eternally holds its peace, and ignores you,though you dig foundations for cathedrals. yet was this half-horriblestolidity in him, involving, too, as it appeared, an all-ramifyingheartlessness;_yet was it oddly dashed at times, with an old,crutch-like, antediluvian, wheezing humorousness, not unstreaked nowand then with a certain grizzled wittiness; such as might have servedto pass the time during the midnight watch on the bearded forecastleof noah's ark. was it that this old carpenter had been a life-longwanderer, whose much rolling, to and fro, not only had gathered no moss;but what is more, had rubbed off whatever small outward clingingsmight have originally pertained to him? he was a stript abstract; anunfractioned integral; uncompromised as a new-born babe; living withoutpremeditated reference to this world or the next. you might almostsay, that this strange uncompromisedness in him involved a sort ofunintelligence; for in his numerous trades, he did not seem to work somuch by reason or by instinct, or simply because he had been tutored toit, or by any intermixture of all these, even or uneven; but merely bya kind of deaf and dumb, spontaneous literal process. he was a puremanipulator; his brain, if he had ever had one, must have earlyoozed along into the muscles of his fingers. he was like one ofthose unreasoning but still highly useful, multum in parvo, sheffieldcontrivances, assuming the exterior_though a little swelled_of acommon pocket knife; but containing, not only blades of various sizes,but also screw-drivers, cork-screws, tweezers, awls, pens, rulers,nail-filers, countersinkers. so, if his superiors wanted to use thecarpenter for a screw-driver, all they had to do was to open that partof him, and the screw was fast: or if for tweezers, take him up by thelegs, and there they were.yet, as previously hinted, this omnitooled, open-and-shut carpenter,was, after all, no mere machine of an automaton. if he did not have acommon soul in him, he had a subtle something that somehow anomalouslydid its duty. what that was, whether essence of quicksilver, or a fewdrops of hartshorn, there is no telling. but there it was; and there ithad abided for now some sixty years or more. and this it was, this sameunaccountable, cunning life-principle in him; this it was, that kepthim a great part of the time soliloquizing; but only like an unreasoningwheel, which also hummingly soliloquizes; or rather, his body was asentry-box and this soliloquizer on guard there, and talking all thetime to keep himself awake.chapter 108. ahab and the carpenter. the deck_first night watch.(carpenter standing before his vice-bench, and by the light of twolanterns busily filing the ivory joist for the leg, which joist isfirmly fixed in the vice. slabs of ivory, leather straps, pads, screws,and various tools of all sorts lying about the bench. forward, the redflame of the forge is seen, where the blacksmith is at work.)drat the file, and drat the bone! that is hard which should be soft,and that is soft which should be hard. so we go, who file old jaws andshinbones. let's try another. aye, now, this works better (sneezes).halloa, this bone dust is (sneezes)_why it's (sneezes)_yes it's(sneezes)_bless my soul, it won't let me speak! this is what an oldfellow gets now for working in dead lumber. saw a live tree, and youdon't get this dust; amputate a live bone, and you don't get it(sneezes). come, come, you old smut, there, bear a hand, and let'shave that ferule and buckle-screw; i'll be ready for them presently.lucky now (sneezes) there's no knee-joint to make; that might puzzle alittle; but a mere shinbone_why it's easy as making hop-poles; onlyi should like to put a good finish on. time, time; if i but only had thetime, i could turn him out as neat a leg now as ever (sneezes) scrapedto a lady in a parlor. those buckskin legs and calves of legs i'veseen in shop windows wouldn't compare at all. they soak water, theydo; and of course get rheumatic, and have to be doctored (sneezes) withwashes and lotions, just like live legs. there; before i saw it off,now, i must call his old mogulship, and see whether the length will beall right; too short, if anything, i guess. ha! that's the heel; weare in luck; here he comes, or it's somebody else, that's certain.ahab (advancing). (during the ensuing scene, the carpenter continuessneezing at times.)well, manmaker!just in time, sir. if the captain pleases, i will now mark the length.let me measure, sir.measured for a leg! good. well, it's not the first time. about it!there; keep thy finger on it. this is a cogent vice thou hast here,carpenter; let me feel its grip once. so, so; it does pinch some.oh, sir, it will break bones_beware, beware!no fear; i like a good grip; i like to feel something in this slipperyworld that can hold, man. what's prometheus about there?_theblacksmith, i mean_what's he about?he must be forging the buckle-screw, sir, now.right. it's a partnership; he supplies the muscle part. he makes afierce red flame there!aye, sir; he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work.um-m. so he must. i do deem it now a most meaning thing, that thatold greek, prometheus, who made men, they say, should have been ablacksmith, and animated them with fire; for what's made in fire mustproperly belong to fire; and so hell's probable. how the soot flies!this must be the remainder the greek made the africans of. carpenter,when he's through with that buckle, tell him to forge a pair of steelshoulder-blades; there's a pedlar aboard with a crushing pack.sir?hold; while prometheus is about it, i'll order a complete man after adesirable pattern. imprimis, fifty feet high in his socks; then, chestmodelled after the thames tunnel; then, legs with roots to _em, tostay in one place; then, arms three feet through the wrist; no heart atall, brass forehead, and about a quarter of an acre of fine brains; andlet me see_shall i order eyes to see outwards? no, but put a sky-lighton top of his head to illuminate inwards. there, take the order, andaway.now, what's he speaking about, and who's he speaking to, i shouldlike to know? shall i keep standing here? (aside)._tis but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome; here's one.no, no, no; i must have a lantern.ho, ho! that's it, hey? here are two, sir; one will serve my turn.what art thou thrusting that thief-catcher into my face for, man?thrusted light is worse than presented pistols.i thought, sir, that you spoke to carpenter.carpenter? why that's_but no;_a very tidy, and, i may say,an extremely gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here,carpenter;_or would'st thou rather work in clay?sir?_clay? clay, sir? that's mud; we leave clay to ditchers, sir.the fellow's impious! what art thou sneezing about?bone is rather dusty, sir.take the hint, then; and when thou art dead, never bury thyself underliving people's noses.sir?_oh! ah!_i guess so;_yes_dear!look ye, carpenter, i dare say thou callest thyself a right goodworkmanlike workman, eh? well, then, will it speak thoroughly wellfor thy work, if, when i come to mount this leg thou makest, i shallnevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it; thatis, carpenter, my old lost leg; the flesh and blood one, i mean. canstthou not drive that old adam away?truly, sir, i begin to understand somewhat now. yes, i have heardsomething curious on that score, sir; how that a dismasted man neverentirely loses the feeling of his old spar, but it will be stillpricking him at times. may i humbly ask if it be really so, sir?it is, man. look, put thy live leg here in the place where mine oncewas; so, now, here is only one distinct leg to the eye, yet two to thesoul. where thou feelest tingling life; there, exactly there, there to ahair, do i. is't a riddle?i should humbly call it a poser, sir.hist, then. how dost thou know that some entire, living, thinking thingmay not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing precisely wherethou now standest; aye, and standing there in thy spite? in thy mostsolitary hours, then, dost thou not fear eavesdroppers? hold, don'tspeak! and if i still feel the smart of my crushed leg, though it be nowso long dissolved; then, why mayst not thou, carpenter, feel the fierypains of hell for ever, and without a body? hah!good lord! truly, sir, if it comes to that, i must calculate over again;i think i didn't carry a small figure, sir.look ye, pudding-heads should never grant premises._how long beforethe leg is done?perhaps an hour, sir.bungle away at it then, and bring it to me (turns to go). oh, life! herei am, proud as greek god, and yet standing debtor to this blockhead fora bone to stand on! cursed be that mortal inter-indebtedness which willnot do away with ledgers. i would be free as air; and i'm down in thewhole world's books. i am so rich, i could have given bid for bid withthe wealthiest praetorians at the auction of the roman empire (which wasthe world's); and yet i owe for the flesh in the tongue i brag with.by heavens! i'll get a crucible, and into it, and dissolve myself downto one small, compendious vertebra. so.carpenter (resuming his work).well, well, well! stubb knows him best of all, and stubb always sayshe's queer; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer;he's queer, says stubb; he's queer_queer, queer; and keeps dinningit into mr. starbuck all the time_queer_sir_queer, queer, veryqueer. and here's his leg! yes, now that i think of it, here's hisbedfellow! has a stick of whale's jaw-bone for a wife! and this is hisleg; he'll stand on this. what was that now about one leg standing inthree places, and all three places standing in one hell_how wasthat? oh! i don't wonder he looked so scornful at me! i'm a sort ofstrange-thoughted sometimes, they say; but that's only haphazard-like.then, a short, little old body like me, should never undertake to wadeout into deep waters with tall, heron-built captains; the waterchucks you under the chin pretty quick, and there's a great cry forlife-boats. and here's the heron's leg! long and slim, sure enough!now, for most folks one pair of legs lasts a lifetime, and that must bebecause they use them mercifully, as a tender-hearted old lady uses herroly-poly old coach-horses. but ahab; oh he's a hard driver. look,driven one leg to death, and spavined the other for life, and now wearsout bone legs by the cord. halloa, there, you smut! bear a hand therewith those screws, and let's finish it before the resurrectionfellow comes a-calling with his horn for all legs, true or false, asbrewery-men go round collecting old beer barrels, to fill _em upagain. what a leg this is! it looks like a real live leg, filed down tonothing but the core; he'll be standing on this to-morrow; he'll betaking altitudes on it. halloa! i almost forgot the little oval slate,smoothed ivory, where he figures up the latitude. so, so; chisel, file,and sand-paper, now!chapter 109. ahab and starbuck in the cabin.according to usage they were pumping the ship next morning; and lo! noinconsiderable oil came up with the water; the casks below must havesprung a bad leak. much concern was shown; and starbuck went down intothe cabin to report this unfavourable affair.**in sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board, itis a regular semiweekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold, and drenchthe casks with sea-water; which afterwards, at varying intervals, isremoved by the ship's pumps. hereby the casks are sought to be keptdamply tight; while by the changed character of the withdrawn water, themariners readily detect any serious leakage in the precious cargo.now, from the south and west the pequod was drawing nigh to formosa andthe bashee isles, between which lies one of the tropical outlets fromthe china waters into the pacific. and so starbuck found ahab witha general chart of the oriental archipelagoes spread before him;and another separate one representing the long eastern coasts of thejapanese islands_niphon, matsmai, and sikoke. with his snow-white newivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table, and with a longpruning-hook of a jack-knife in his hand, the wondrous old man, with hisback to the gangway door, was wrinkling his brow, and tracing his oldcourses again."who's there?" hearing the footstep at the door, but not turninground to it. "on deck! begone!""captain ahab mistakes; it is i. the oil in the hold is leaking, sir.we must up burtons and break out.""up burtons and break out? now that we are nearing japan; heave-tohere for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops?""either do that, sir, or waste in one day more oil than we may makegood in a year. what we come twenty thousand miles to get is worthsaving, sir.""so it is, so it is; if we get it.""i was speaking of the oil in the hold, sir.""and i was not speaking or thinking of that at all. begone! let itleak! i'm all aleak myself. aye! leaks in leaks! not only full ofleaky casks, but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship; and that's afar worse plight than the pequod's, man. yet i don't stop to plug myleak; for who can find it in the deep-loaded hull; or how hope to plugit, even if found, in this life's howling gale? starbuck! i'll nothave the burtons hoisted.""what will the owners say, sir?""let the owners stand on nantucket beach and outyell the typhoons.what cares ahab? owners, owners? thou art always prating to me,starbuck, about those miserly owners, as if the owners were myconscience. but look ye, the only real owner of anything is itscommander; and hark ye, my conscience is in this ship's keel._ondeck!""captain ahab," said the reddening mate, moving further into thecabin, with a daring so strangely respectful and cautious that italmost seemed not only every way seeking to avoid the slightestoutward manifestation of itself, but within also seemed more than halfdistrustful of itself; "a better man than i might well pass over inthee what he would quickly enough resent in a younger man; aye, and in ahappier, captain ahab.""devils! dost thou then so much as dare to critically think ofme?_on deck!""nay, sir, not yet; i do entreat. and i do dare, sir_to beforbearing! shall we not understand each other better than hitherto,captain ahab?"ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack (forming part of mostsouth-sea-men's cabin furniture), and pointing it towards starbuck,exclaimed: "there is one god that is lord over the earth, and onecaptain that is lord over the pequod._on deck!"for an instant in the flashing eyes of the mate, and his fiery cheeks,you would have almost thought that he had really received the blaze ofthe levelled tube. but, mastering his emotion, he half calmly rose, andas he quitted the cabin, paused for an instant and said: "thou hastoutraged, not insulted me, sir; but for that i ask thee not to beware ofstarbuck; thou wouldst but laugh; but let ahab beware of ahab; beware ofthyself, old man.""he waxes brave, but nevertheless obeys; most careful bravery that!"murmured ahab, as starbuck disappeared. "what's that he said_ahabbeware of ahab_there's something there!" then unconsciously usingthe musket for a staff, with an iron brow he paced to and fro in thelittle cabin; but presently the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed,and returning the gun to the rack, he went to the deck."thou art but too good a fellow, starbuck," he said lowly to themate; then raising his voice to the crew: "furl the t'gallant-sails,and close-reef the top-sails, fore and aft; back the main-yard; upburton, and break out in the main-hold."it were perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was, that as respectingstarbuck, ahab thus acted. it may have been a flash of honesty in him;or mere prudential policy which, under the circumstance, imperiouslyforbade the slightest symptom of open disaffection, however transient,in the important chief officer of his ship. however it was, his orderswere executed; and the burtons were hoisted.chapter 110. queequeg in his coffin.upon searching, it was found that the casks last struck into the holdwere perfectly sound, and that the leak must be further off. so, itbeing calm weather, they broke out deeper and deeper, disturbing theslumbers of the huge ground-tier butts; and from that black midnightsending those gigantic moles into the daylight above. so deep did theygo; and so ancient, and corroded, and weedy the aspect of the lowermostpuncheons, that you almost looked next for some mouldy corner-stone caskcontaining coins of captain noah, with copies of the posted placards,vainly warning the infatuated old world from the flood. tierce aftertierce, too, of water, and bread, and beef, and shooks of staves, andiron bundles of hoops, were hoisted out, till at last the piled deckswere hard to get about; and the hollow hull echoed under foot, as ifyou were treading over empty catacombs, and reeled and rolled in the sealike an air-freighted demijohn. top-heavy was the ship as a dinnerlessstudent with all aristotle in his head. well was it that the typhoonsdid not visit them then.now, at this time it was that my poor pagan companion, and fastbosom-friend, queequeg, was seized with a fever, which brought him nighto his endless end.be it said, that in this vocation of whaling, sinecures are unknown;dignity and danger go hand in hand; till you get to be captain, thehigher you rise the harder you toil. so with poor queequeg, who,as harpooneer, must not only face all the rage of the living whale,but_as we have elsewhere seen_mount his dead back in a rolling sea;and finally descend into the gloom of the hold, and bitterly sweatingall day in that subterraneous confinement, resolutely manhandle theclumsiest casks and see to their stowage. to be short, among whalemen,the harpooneers are the holders, so called.poor queequeg! when the ship was about half disembowelled, you shouldhave stooped over the hatchway, and peered down upon him there; where,stripped to his woollen drawers, the tattooed savage was crawling aboutamid that dampness and slime, like a green spotted lizard at the bottomof a well. and a well, or an ice-house, it somehow proved to him, poorpagan; where, strange to say, for all the heat of his sweatings, hecaught a terrible chill which lapsed into a fever; and at last, aftersome days' suffering, laid him in his hammock, close to the verysill of the door of death. how he wasted and wasted away in those fewlong-lingering days, till there seemed but little left of him but hisframe and tattooing. but as all else in him thinned, and his cheek-bonesgrew sharper, his eyes, nevertheless, seemed growing fuller and fuller;they became of a strange softness of lustre; and mildly but deeplylooked out at you there from his sickness, a wondrous testimony to thatimmortal health in him which could not die, or be weakened. and likecircles on the water, which, as they grow fainter, expand; so his eyesseemed rounding and rounding, like the rings of eternity. an awe thatcannot be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of thiswaning savage, and saw as strange things in his face, as any beheld whowere bystanders when zoroaster died. for whatever is truly wondrous andfearful in man, never yet was put into words or books. and the drawingnear of death, which alike levels all, alike impresses all with a lastrevelation, which only an author from the dead could adequately tell.so that_let us say it again_no dying chaldee or greek had higherand holier thoughts than those, whose mysterious shades you saw creepingover the face of poor queequeg, as he quietly lay in his swayinghammock, and the rolling sea seemed gently rocking him to his finalrest, and the ocean's invisible flood-tide lifted him higher andhigher towards his destined heaven.not a man of the crew but gave him up; and, as for queequeg himself,what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favour heasked. he called one to him in the grey morning watch, when the day wasjust breaking, and taking his hand, said that while in nantucket hehad chanced to see certain little canoes of dark wood, like the richwar-wood of his native isle; and upon inquiry, he had learned that allwhalemen who died in nantucket, were laid in those same dark canoes,and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him; for it was notunlike the custom of his own race, who, after embalming a dead warrior,stretched him out in his canoe, and so left him to be floated away tothe starry archipelagoes; for not only do they believe that the starsare isles, but that far beyond all visible horizons, their own mild,uncontinented seas, interflow with the blue heavens; and so form thewhite breakers of the milky way. he added, that he shuddered atthe thought of being buried in his hammock, according to the usualsea-custom, tossed like something vile to the death-devouring sharks.no: he desired a canoe like those of nantucket, all the more congenialto him, being a whaleman, that like a whale-boat these coffin-canoeswere without a keel; though that involved but uncertain steering, andmuch lee-way adown the dim ages.now, when this strange circumstance was made known aft, the carpenterwas at once commanded to do queequeg's bidding, whatever it mightinclude. there was some heathenish, coffin-coloured old lumber aboard,which, upon a long previous voyage, had been cut from the aboriginalgroves of the lackaday islands, and from these dark planks the coffinwas recommended to be made. no sooner was the carpenter apprised ofthe order, than taking his rule, he forthwith with all the indifferentpromptitude of his character, proceeded into the forecastle andtook queequeg's measure with great accuracy, regularly chalkingqueequeg's person as he shifted the rule."ah! poor fellow! he'll have to die now," ejaculated the longisland sailor.going to his vice-bench, the carpenter for convenience sake and generalreference, now transferringly measured on it the exact length the coffinwas to be, and then made the transfer permanent by cutting two notchesat its extremities. this done, he marshalled the planks and his tools,and to work.when the last nail was driven, and the lid duly planed and fitted,he lightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it, inquiringwhether they were ready for it yet in that direction.overhearing the indignant but half-humorous cries with which the peopleon deck began to drive the coffin away, queequeg, to every one'sconsternation, commanded that the thing should be instantly brought tohim, nor was there any denying him; seeing that, of all mortals, somedying men are the most tyrannical; and certainly, since they willshortly trouble us so little for evermore, the poor fellows ought to beindulged.leaning over in his hammock, queequeg long regarded the coffin withan attentive eye. he then called for his harpoon, had the wooden stockdrawn from it, and then had the iron part placed in the coffin alongwith one of the paddles of his boat. all by his own request, also,biscuits were then ranged round the sides within: a flask of fresh waterwas placed at the head, and a small bag of woody earth scraped up inthe hold at the foot; and a piece of sail-cloth being rolled up for apillow, queequeg now entreated to be lifted into his final bed, that hemight make trial of its comforts, if any it had. he lay without movinga few minutes, then told one to go to his bag and bring out his littlegod, yojo. then crossing his arms on his breast with yojo between, hecalled for the coffin lid (hatch he called it) to be placed over him.the head part turned over with a leather hinge, and there lay queequegin his coffin with little but his composed countenance in view."rarmai" (it will do; it is easy), he murmured at last, and signedto be replaced in his hammock.but ere this was done, pip, who had been slily hovering near by all thiswhile, drew nigh to him where he lay, and with soft sobbings, took himby the hand; in the other, holding his tambourine."poor rover! will ye never have done with all this weary roving? wherego ye now? but if the currents carry ye to those sweet antilles wherethe beaches are only beat with water-lilies, will ye do one littleerrand for me? seek out one pip, who's now been missing long: i thinkhe's in those far antilles. if ye find him, then comfort him; for hemust be very sad; for look! he's left his tambourine behind;_i foundit. rig-a-dig, dig, dig! now, queequeg, die; and i'll beat ye yourdying march.""i have heard," murmured starbuck, gazing down the scuttle, "thatin violent fevers, men, all ignorance, have talked in ancient tongues;and that when the mystery is probed, it turns out always that in theirwholly forgotten childhood those ancient tongues had been really spokenin their hearing by some lofty scholars. so, to my fond faith, poor pip,in this strange sweetness of his lunacy, brings heavenly vouchers of allour heavenly homes. where learned he that, but there?_hark! he speaksagain: but more wildly now.""form two and two! let's make a general of him! ho, where's hisharpoon? lay it across here._rig-a-dig, dig, dig! huzza! oh for a gamecock now to sit upon his head and crow! queequeg dies game!_mind yethat; queequeg dies game!_take ye good heed of that; queequeg diesgame! i say; game, game, game! but base little pip, he died a coward;died all a'shiver;_out upon pip! hark ye; if ye find pip, tell allthe antilles he's a runaway; a coward, a coward, a coward! tell themhe jumped from a whale-boat! i'd never beat my tambourine over basepip, and hail him general, if he were once more dying here. no, no!shame upon all cowards_shame upon them! let _em go drown like pip,that jumped from a whale-boat. shame! shame!"during all this, queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream. pipwas led away, and the sick man was replaced in his hammock.but now that he had apparently made every preparation for death; nowthat his coffin was proved a good fit, queequeg suddenly rallied; soonthere seemed no need of the carpenter's box: and thereupon, when someexpressed their delighted surprise, he, in substance, said, that thecause of his sudden convalescence was this;_at a critical moment, hehad just recalled a little duty ashore, which he was leaving undone;and therefore had changed his mind about dying: he could not die yet,he averred. they asked him, then, whether to live or die was a matter ofhis own sovereign will and pleasure. he answered, certainly. in a word,it was queequeg's conceit, that if a man made up his mind to live,mere sickness could not kill him: nothing but a whale, or a gale, orsome violent, ungovernable, unintelligent destroyer of that sort.now, there is this noteworthy difference between savage and civilized;that while a sick, civilized man may be six months convalescing,generally speaking, a sick savage is almost half-well again in a day.so, in good time my queequeg gained strength; and at length aftersitting on the windlass for a few indolent days (but eating with avigorous appetite) he suddenly leaped to his feet, threw out his armsand legs, gave himself a good stretching, yawned a little bit, and thenspringing into the head of his hoisted boat, and poising a harpoon,pronounced himself fit for a fight.with a wild whimsiness, he now used his coffin for a sea-chest; andemptying into it his canvas bag of clothes, set them in order there.many spare hours he spent, in carving the lid with all manner ofgrotesque figures and drawings; and it seemed that hereby he wasstriving, in his rude way, to copy parts of the twisted tattooing onhis body. and this tattooing had been the work of a departed prophet andseer of his island, who, by those hieroglyphic marks, had written out onhis body a complete theory of the heavens and the earth, and a mysticaltreatise on the art of attaining truth; so that queequeg in his ownproper person was a riddle to unfold; a wondrous work in one volume; butwhose mysteries not even himself could read, though his own live heartbeat against them; and these mysteries were therefore destined inthe end to moulder away with the living parchment whereon they wereinscribed, and so be unsolved to the last. and this thought it musthave been which suggested to ahab that wild exclamation of his, whenone morning turning away from surveying poor queequeg_"oh, devilishtantalization of the gods!"chapter 111. the pacific.when gliding by the bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great southsea; were it not for other things, i could have greeted my dear pacificwith uncounted thanks, for now the long supplication of my youth wasanswered; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a thousand leaguesof blue.there is, one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea, whose gentlyawful stirrings seem to speak of some hidden soul beneath; like thosefabled undulations of the ephesian sod over the buried evangelist st.john. and meet it is, that over these sea-pastures, wide-rolling wateryprairies and potters' fields of all four continents, the waves shouldrise and fall, and ebb and flow unceasingly; for here, millions of mixedshades and shadows, drowned dreams, somnambulisms, reveries; all thatwe call lives and souls, lie dreaming, dreaming, still; tossing likeslumberers in their beds; the ever-rolling waves but made so by theirrestlessness.to any meditative magian rover, this serene pacific, once beheld, mustever after be the sea of his adoption. it rolls the midmost waters ofthe world, the indian ocean and atlantic being but its arms. the samewaves wash the moles of the new-built californian towns, but yesterdayplanted by the recentest race of men, and lave the faded but stillgorgeous skirts of asiatic lands, older than abraham; while all betweenfloat milky-ways of coral isles, and low-lying, endless, unknownarchipelagoes, and impenetrable japans. thus this mysterious, divinepacific zones the world's whole bulk about; makes all coasts one bayto it; seems the tide-beating heart of earth. lifted by those eternalswells, you needs must own the seductive god, bowing your head to pan.but few thoughts of pan stirred ahab's brain, as standing like aniron statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging, with onenostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the bashee isles(in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking), and with the otherconsciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea; that sea inwhich the hated white whale must even then be swimming. launched atlength upon these almost final waters, and gliding towards the japanesecruising-ground, the old man's purpose intensified itself. his firmlips met like the lips of a vice; the delta of his forehead's veinsswelled like overladen brooks; in his very sleep, his ringing cry ranthrough the vaulted hull, "stern all! the white whale spouts thickblood!"chapter 112. the blacksmith.availing himself of the mild, summer-cool weather that now reigned inthese latitudes, and in preparation for the peculiarly activepursuits shortly to be anticipated, perth, the begrimed, blistered oldblacksmith, had not removed his portable forge to the hold again, afterconcluding his contributory work for ahab's leg, but still retainedit on deck, fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast; being now almostincessantly invoked by the headsmen, and harpooneers, and bowsmen to dosome little job for them; altering, or repairing, or new shaping theirvarious weapons and boat furniture. often he would be surrounded by aneager circle, all waiting to be served; holding boat-spades, pike-heads,harpoons, and lances, and jealously watching his every sooty movement,as he toiled. nevertheless, this old man's was a patient hammerwielded by a patient arm. no murmur, no impatience, no petulance didcome from him. silent, slow, and solemn; bowing over still further hischronically broken back, he toiled away, as if toil were life itself,and the heavy beating of his hammer the heavy beating of his heart. andso it was._most miserable!a peculiar walk in this old man, a certain slight but painful appearingyawing in his gait, had at an early period of the voyage excited thecuriosity of the mariners. and to the importunity of their persistedquestionings he had finally given in; and so it came to pass that everyone now knew the shameful story of his wretched fate.belated, and not innocently, one bitter winter's midnight, on the roadrunning between two country towns, the blacksmith half-stupidly feltthe deadly numbness stealing over him, and sought refuge in a leaning,dilapidated barn. the issue was, the loss of the extremities of bothfeet. out of this revelation, part by part, at last came out the fouracts of the gladness, and the one long, and as yet uncatastrophied fifthact of the grief of his life's drama.he was an old man, who, at the age of nearly sixty, had postponedlyencountered that thing in sorrow's technicals called ruin. he had beenan artisan of famed excellence, and with plenty to do; owned a houseand garden; embraced a youthful, daughter-like, loving wife, and threeblithe, ruddy children; every sunday went to a cheerful-looking church,planted in a grove. but one night, under cover of darkness, and furtherconcealed in a most cunning disguisement, a desperate burglar slid intohis happy home, and robbed them all of everything. and darker yet totell, the blacksmith himself did ignorantly conduct this burglar intohis family's heart. it was the bottle conjuror! upon the opening ofthat fatal cork, forth flew the fiend, and shrivelled up his home. now,for prudent, most wise, and economic reasons, the blacksmith's shopwas in the basement of his dwelling, but with a separate entrance to it;so that always had the young and loving healthy wife listened with nounhappy nervousness, but with vigorous pleasure, to the stout ringing ofher young-armed old husband's hammer; whose reverberations, muffled bypassing through the floors and walls, came up to her, not unsweetly, inher nursery; and so, to stout labor's iron lullaby, the blacksmith'sinfants were rocked to slumber.oh, woe on woe! oh, death, why canst thou not sometimes be timely? hadstthou taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruin came uponhim, then had the young widow had a delicious grief, and her orphans atruly venerable, legendary sire to dream of in their after years; andall of them a care-killing competency. but death plucked down somevirtuous elder brother, on whose whistling daily toil solely hung theresponsibilities of some other family, and left the worse than uselessold man standing, till the hideous rot of life should make him easier toharvest.why tell the whole? the blows of the basement hammer every day grew moreand more between; and each blow every day grew fainter than the last;the wife sat frozen at the window, with tearless eyes, glitteringlygazing into the weeping faces of her children; the bellows fell; theforge choked up with cinders; the house was sold; the mother diveddown into the long church-yard grass; her children twice followed herthither; and the houseless, familyless old man staggered off a vagabondin crape; his every woe unreverenced; his grey head a scorn to flaxencurls!death seems the only desirable sequel for a career like this; but deathis only a launching into the region of the strange untried; it is butthe first salutation to the possibilities of the immense remote, thewild, the watery, the unshored; therefore, to the death-longing eyes ofsuch men, who still have left in them some interior compunctions againstsuicide, does the all-contributed and all-receptive ocean alluringlyspread forth his whole plain of unimaginable, taking terrors, andwonderful, new-life adventures; and from the hearts of infinitepacifics, the thousand mermaids sing to them_"come hither,broken-hearted; here is another life without the guilt of intermediatedeath; here are wonders supernatural, without dying for them. comehither! bury thyself in a life which, to your now equally abhorred andabhorring, landed world, is more oblivious than death. come hither! putup thy gravestone, too, within the churchyard, and come hither, till wemarry thee!"hearkening to these voices, east and west, by early sunrise, and by fallof eve, the blacksmith's soul responded, aye, i come! and so perthwent a-whaling.chapter 113. the forge.with matted beard, and swathed in a bristling shark-skin apron, aboutmid-day, perth was standing between his forge and anvil, the latterplaced upon an iron-wood log, with one hand holding a pike-head in thecoals, and with the other at his forge's lungs, when captain ahab camealong, carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking leathern bag. whileyet a little distance from the forge, moody ahab paused; till at last,perth, withdrawing his iron from the fire, began hammering it upon theanvil_the red mass sending off the sparks in thick hovering flights,some of which flew close to ahab."are these thy mother carey's chickens, perth? they are alwaysflying in thy wake; birds of good omen, too, but not to all;_lookhere, they burn; but thou_thou liv'st among them without ascorch.""because i am scorched all over, captain ahab," answered perth,resting for a moment on his hammer; "i am past scorching; not easilycan'st thou scorch a scar.""well, well; no more. thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly, sanelywoeful to me. in no paradise myself, i am impatient of all misery inothers that is not mad. thou should'st go mad, blacksmith; say, whydost thou not go mad? how can'st thou endure without being mad? do theheavens yet hate thee, that thou can'st not go mad?_what wert thoumaking there?""welding an old pike-head, sir; there were seams and dents in it.""and can'st thou make it all smooth again, blacksmith, after suchhard usage as it had?""i think so, sir.""and i suppose thou can'st smoothe almost any seams and dents; nevermind how hard the metal, blacksmith?""aye, sir, i think i can; all seams and dents but one.""look ye here, then," cried ahab, passionately advancing,and leaning with both hands on perth's shoulders; "look yehere_here_can ye smoothe out a seam like this, blacksmith,"sweeping one hand across his ribbed brow; "if thou could'st,blacksmith, glad enough would i lay my head upon thy anvil, and feelthy heaviest hammer between my eyes. answer! can'st thou smoothe thisseam?""oh! that is the one, sir! said i not all seams and dents but one?""aye, blacksmith, it is the one; aye, man, it is unsmoothable; forthough thou only see'st it here in my flesh, it has worked down intothe bone of my skull_that is all wrinkles! but, away with child'splay; no more gaffs and pikes to-day. look ye here!" jingling theleathern bag, as if it were full of gold coins. "i, too, want aharpoon made; one that a thousand yoke of fiends could not part, perth;something that will stick in a whale like his own fin-bone. there'sthe stuff," flinging the pouch upon the anvil. "look ye, blacksmith,these are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel shoes of racinghorses.""horse-shoe stubbs, sir? why, captain ahab, thou hast here, then, thebest and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work.""i know it, old man; these stubbs will weld together like glue fromthe melted bones of murderers. quick! forge me the harpoon. and forge mefirst, twelve rods for its shank; then wind, and twist, and hammer thesetwelve together like the yarns and strands of a tow-line. quick! i'llblow the fire."when at last the twelve rods were made, ahab tried them, one by one, byspiralling them, with his own hand, round a long, heavy iron bolt. "aflaw!" rejecting the last one. "work that over again, perth."this done, perth was about to begin welding the twelve into one, whenahab stayed his hand, and said he would weld his own iron. as, then,with regular, gasping hems, he hammered on the anvil, perth passing tohim the glowing rods, one after the other, and the hard pressed forgeshooting up its intense straight flame, the parsee passed silently, andbowing over his head towards the fire, seemed invoking some curse orsome blessing on the toil. but, as ahab looked up, he slid aside."what's that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for?" mutteredstubb, looking on from the forecastle. "that parsee smells fire like afusee; and smells of it himself, like a hot musket's powder-pan."at last the shank, in one complete rod, received its final heat; and asperth, to temper it, plunged it all hissing into the cask of water nearby, the scalding steam shot up into ahab's bent face."would'st thou brand me, perth?" wincing for a moment with thepain; "have i been but forging my own branding-iron, then?""pray god, not that; yet i fear something, captain ahab. is not thisharpoon for the white whale?""for the white fiend! but now for the barbs; thou must make themthyself, man. here are my razors_the best of steel; here, and make thebarbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the icy sea."for a moment, the old blacksmith eyed the razors as though he would fainnot use them."take them, man, i have no need for them; for i now neither shave,sup, nor pray till_but here_to work!"fashioned at last into an arrowy shape, and welded by perth to theshank, the steel soon pointed the end of the iron; and as the blacksmithwas about giving the barbs their final heat, prior to tempering them, hecried to ahab to place the water-cask near."no, no_no water for that; i want it of the true death-temper. ahoy,there! tashtego, queequeg, daggoo! what say ye, pagans! will ye give meas much blood as will cover this barb?" holding it high up. a clusterof dark nods replied, yes. three punctures were made in the heathenflesh, and the white whale's barbs were then tempered."ego non baptizo te in nomine patris, sed in nomine diaboli!"deliriously howled ahab, as the malignant iron scorchingly devoured thebaptismal blood.now, mustering the spare poles from below, and selecting one of hickory,with the bark still investing it, ahab fitted the end to the socket ofthe iron. a coil of new tow-line was then unwound, and some fathoms ofit taken to the windlass, and stretched to a great tension. pressinghis foot upon it, till the rope hummed like a harp-string, then eagerlybending over it, and seeing no strandings, ahab exclaimed, "good! andnow for the seizings."at one extremity the rope was unstranded, and the separate spread yarnswere all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon; the polewas then driven hard up into the socket; from the lower end the rope wastraced half-way along the pole's length, and firmly secured so, withintertwistings of twine. this done, pole, iron, and rope_like thethree fates_remained inseparable, and ahab moodily stalked away withthe weapon; the sound of his ivory leg, and the sound of the hickorypole, both hollowly ringing along every plank. but ere he entered hiscabin, light, unnatural, half-bantering, yet most piteous sound washeard. oh, pip! thy wretched laugh, thy idle but unresting eye; all thystrange mummeries not unmeaningly blended with the black tragedy of themelancholy ship, and mocked it!chapter 114. the gilder.penetrating further and further into the heart of the japanese cruisingground, the pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. often, in mild,pleasant weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on thestretch, they were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or sailing,or paddling after the whales, or for an interlude of sixty or seventyminutes calmly awaiting their uprising; though with but small successfor their pains.at such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slowheaving swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and sosociably mixing with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stonecats they purr against the gunwale; these are the times of dreamyquietude, when beholding the tranquil beauty and brilliancy of theocean's skin, one forgets the tiger heart that pants beneath it;and would not willingly remember, that this velvet paw but conceals aremorseless fang.these are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels acertain filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that heregards it as so much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealingonly the tops of her masts, seems struggling forward, not through highrolling waves, but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie: as whenthe western emigrants' horses only show their erected ears, whiletheir hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure.the long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over thesethere steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-weariedchildren lie sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad may-time, whenthe flowers of the woods are plucked. and all this mixes with your mostmystic mood; so that fact and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate,and form one seamless whole.nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least astemporary an effect on ahab. but if these secret golden keys did seemto open in him his own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath uponthem prove but tarnishing.oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; inye,_though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,_inye, men yet may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and forsome few fleeting moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal onthem. would to god these blessed calms would last. but the mingled,mingling threads of life are woven by warp and woof: calms crossed bystorms, a storm for every calm. there is no steady unretracing progressin this life; we do not advance through fixed gradations, and at thelast one pause:_through infancy's unconscious spell, boyhood'sthoughtless faith, adolescence' doubt (the common doom), thenscepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood's ponderingrepose of if. but once gone through, we trace the round again; and areinfants, boys, and men, and ifs eternally. where lies the final harbor,whence we unmoor no more? in what rapt ether sails the world, of whichthe weariest will never weary? where is the foundling's father hidden?our souls are like those orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearingthem: the secret of our paternity lies in their grave, and we must thereto learn it.and that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat's side into thatsame golden sea, starbuck lowly murmured:_"loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride'seye!_tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnappingcannibal ways. let faith oust fact; let fancy oust memory; i look deepdown and do believe."and stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that samegolden light:_"i am stubb, and stubb has his history; but here stubb takes oathsthat he has always been jolly!"chapter 115. the pequod meets the bachelor.and jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing downbefore the wind, some few weeks after ahab's harpoon had been welded.it was a nantucket ship, the bachelor, which had just wedged in herlast cask of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in gladholiday apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously, sailinground among the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous topointing her prow for home.the three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red buntingat their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended, bottom down;and hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of thelast whale they had slain. signals, ensigns, and jacks of all colourswere flying from her rigging, on every side. sideways lashed in each ofher three basketed tops were two barrels of sperm; above which, in hertop-mast cross-trees, you saw slender breakers of the same preciousfluid; and nailed to her main truck was a brazen lamp.as was afterwards learned, the bachelor had met with the most surprisingsuccess; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in the sameseas numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing asingle fish. not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away tomake room for the far more valuable sperm, but additional supplementalcasks had been bartered for, from the ships she had met; and thesewere stowed along the deck, and in the captain's and officers'state-rooms. even the cabin table itself had been knocked intokindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of anoil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. in the forecastle,the sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests, and filledthem; it was humorously added, that the cook had clapped a head on hislargest boiler, and filled it; that the steward had plugged his sparecoffee-pot and filled it; that the harpooneers had headed the socketsof their irons and filled them; that indeed everything was filled withsperm, except the captain's pantaloons pockets, and those he reservedto thrust his hands into, in self-complacent testimony of his entiresatisfaction.as this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody pequod, thebarbarian sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawingstill nearer, a crowd of her men were seen standing round her hugetry-pots, which, covered with the parchment-like poke or stomach skin ofthe black fish, gave forth a loud roar to every stroke of the clenchedhands of the crew. on the quarter-deck, the mates and harpooneers weredancing with the olive-hued girls who had eloped with them from thepolynesian isles; while suspended in an ornamented boat, firmly securedaloft between the foremast and mainmast, three long island negroes, withglittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were presiding over the hilariousjig. meanwhile, others of the ship's company were tumultuously busy atthe masonry of the try-works, from which the huge pots had beenremoved. you would have almost thought they were pulling down the cursedbastille, such wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick andmortar were being hurled into the sea.lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on theship's elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama wasfull before him, and seemed merely contrived for his own individualdiversion.and ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black,with a stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other'swakes_one all jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodingsas to things to come_their two captains in themselves impersonated thewhole striking contrast of the scene."come aboard, come aboard!" cried the gay bachelor's commander,lifting a glass and a bottle in the air."hast seen the white whale?" gritted ahab in reply."no; only heard of him; but don't believe in him at all," said theother good-humoredly. "come aboard!""thou art too damned jolly. sail on. hast lost any men?""not enough to speak of_two islanders, that's all;_but comeaboard, old hearty, come along. i'll soon take that black fromyour brow. come along, will ye (merry's the play); a full ship andhomeward-bound.""how wondrous familiar is a fool!" muttered ahab; then aloud,"thou art a full ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, callme an empty ship, and outward-bound. so go thy ways, and i will mine.forward there! set all sail, and keep her to the wind!"and thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the otherstubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crewof the pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the recedingbachelor; but the bachelor's men never heeding their gaze for thelively revelry they were in. and as ahab, leaning over the taffrail,eyed the homewardbound craft, he took from his pocket a small vialof sand, and then looking from the ship to the vial, seemed therebybringing two remote associations together, for that vial was filled withnantucket soundings.chapter 116. the dying whale.not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune's favouritessail close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of therushing breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. so seemedit with the pequod. for next day after encountering the gay bachelor,whales were seen and four were slain; and one of them by ahab.it was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the crimsonfight were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky, sunand whale both stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and suchplaintiveness, such inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air, thatit almost seemed as if far over from the deep green convent valleys ofthe manilla isles, the spanish land-breeze, wantonly turned sailor, hadgone to sea, freighted with these vesper hymns.soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, ahab, who had sternedoff from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the nowtranquil boat. for that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whalesdying_the turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring_that strangespectacle, beheld of such a placid evening, somehow to ahab conveyed awondrousness unknown before."he turns and turns him to it,_how slowly, but how steadfastly, hishomage-rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. he tooworships fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!_ohthat these too-favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights.look! here, far water-locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe;in these most candid and impartial seas; where to traditions no rocksfurnish tablets; where for long chinese ages, the billows have stillrolled on speechless and unspoken to, as stars that shine upon theniger's unknown source; here, too, life dies sunwards full of faith;but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the corpse, and itheads some other way."oh, thou dark hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hastbuilded thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverduredseas; thou art an infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me inthe wide-slaughtering typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm.nor has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head, and then goneround again, without a lesson to me."oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! oh, high aspiring,rainbowed jet!_that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! invain, oh whale, dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickeningsun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again. yet dostthou, darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith. all thyunnamable imminglings float beneath me here; i am buoyed by breaths ofonce living things, exhaled as air, but water now."then hail, for ever hail, o sea, in whose eternal tossings the wildfowl finds his only rest. born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; thoughhill and valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!"chapter 117. the whale watch.the four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far towindward; one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. theselast three were brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward onecould not be reached till morning; and the boat that had killed it layby its side all night; and that boat was ahab's.the waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale's spout-hole; andthe lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glareupon the black, glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, whichgently chafed the whale's broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.ahab and all his boat's crew seemed asleep but the parsee; whocrouching in the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally playedround the whale, and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails.a sound like the moaning in squadrons over asphaltites of unforgivenghosts of gomorrah, ran shuddering through the air.started from his slumbers, ahab, face to face, saw the parsee; andhooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in aflooded world. "i have dreamed it again," said he."of the hearses? have i not said, old man, that neither hearse norcoffin can be thine?""and who are hearsed that die on the sea?""but i said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, twohearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made bymortal hands; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown inamerica.""aye, aye! a strange sight that, parsee:_a hearse and its plumesfloating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. ha! such asight we shall not soon see.""believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.""and what was that saying about thyself?""though it come to the last, i shall still go before thee thypilot.""and when thou art so gone before_if that ever befall_then ere ican follow, thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?_was itnot so? well, then, did i believe all ye say, oh my pilot! i have heretwo pledges that i shall yet slay moby dick and survive it.""take another pledge, old man," said the parsee, as his eyes lightedup like fire-flies in the gloom_"hemp only can kill thee.""the gallows, ye mean._i am immortal then, on land and on sea,"cried ahab, with a laugh of derision;_"immortal on land and onsea!"both were silent again, as one man. the grey dawn came on, and theslumbering crew arose from the boat's bottom, and ere noon the deadwhale was brought to the ship.chapter 118. the quadrant.the season for the line at length drew near; and every day when ahab,coming from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman wouldostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run tothe braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed onthe nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship's prowfor the equator. in good time the order came. it was hard upon highnoon; and ahab, seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, wasabout taking his wonted daily observation of the sun to determine hislatitude.now, in that japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets ofeffulgences. that unblinkingly vivid japanese sun seems the blazingfocus of the glassy ocean's immeasurable burning-glass. the sky lookslacquered; clouds there are none; the horizon floats; and this nakednessof unrelieved radiance is as the insufferable splendors of god'sthrone. well that ahab's quadrant was furnished with coloured glasses,through which to take sight of that solar fire. so, swinging hisseated form to the roll of the ship, and with his astrological-lookinginstrument placed to his eye, he remained in that posture for somemoments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain itsprecise meridian. meantime while his whole attention was absorbed, theparsee was kneeling beneath him on the ship's deck, and with facethrown up like ahab's, was eyeing the same sun with him; only the lidsof his eyes half hooded their orbs, and his wild face was subdued to anearthly passionlessness. at length the desired observation was taken;and with his pencil upon his ivory leg, ahab soon calculated what hislatitude must be at that precise instant. then falling into a moment'srevery, he again looked up towards the sun and murmured to himself:"thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty pilot! thou tellest me trulywhere i am_but canst thou cast the least hint where i shall be? orcanst thou tell where some other thing besides me is this moment living?where is moby dick? this instant thou must be eyeing him. these eyesof mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye,and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on theunknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!"then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, itsnumerous cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered:"foolish toy! babies' plaything of haughty admirals, and commodores,and captains; the world brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; butwhat after all canst thou do, but tell the poor, pitiful point, wherethou thyself happenest to be on this wide planet, and the hand thatholds thee: no! not one jot more! thou canst not tell where one dropof water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and yet with thyimpotence thou insultest the sun! science! curse thee, thou vain toy;and cursed be all the things that cast man's eyes aloft to thatheaven, whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyesare even now scorched with thy light, o sun! level by nature to thisearth's horizon are the glances of man's eyes; not shot from thecrown of his head, as if god had meant him to gaze on his firmament.curse thee, thou quadrant!" dashing it to the deck, "no longer willi guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship's compass, and thelevel deadreckoning, by log and by line; these shall conduct me, andshow me my place on the sea. aye," lighting from the boat to the deck,"thus i trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest onhigh; thus i split and destroy thee!"as the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his liveand dead feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for ahab, and afatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself_these passed over themute, motionless parsee's face. unobserved he rose and glided away;while, awestruck by the aspect of their commander, the seamen clusteredtogether on the forecastle, till ahab, troubledly pacing the deck,shouted out_"to the braces! up helm!_square in!"in an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled uponher heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised uponher long, ribbed hull, seemed as the three horatii pirouetting on onesufficient steed.standing between the knight-heads, starbuck watched the pequod'stumultuous way, and ahab's also, as he went lurching along the deck."i have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, fullof its tormented flaming life; and i have seen it wane at last, down,down, to dumbest dust. old man of oceans! of all this fiery life ofthine, what will at length remain but one little heap of ashes!""aye," cried stubb, "but sea-coal ashes_mind ye that, mr.starbuck_sea-coal, not your common charcoal. well, well; i heard ahabmutter, _here some one thrusts these cards into these old hands ofmine; swears that i must play them, and no others.' and damn me, ahab,but thou actest right; live in the game, and die in it!"chapter 119. the candles.warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of bengalcrouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. skies the most effulgentbut basket the deadliest thunders: gorgeous cuba knows tornadoesthat never swept tame northern lands. so, too, it is, that in theseresplendent japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst of allstorms, the typhoon. it will sometimes burst from out that cloudlesssky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.towards evening of that day, the pequod was torn of her canvas, andbare-poled was left to fight a typhoon which had struck her directlyahead. when darkness came on, sky and sea roared and split with thethunder, and blazed with the lightning, that showed the disabled mastsfluttering here and there with the rags which the first fury of thetempest had left for its after sport.holding by a shroud, starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at everyflash of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional disastermight have befallen the intricate hamper there; while stubb and flaskwere directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of theboats. but all their pains seemed naught. though lifted to the very topof the cranes, the windward quarter boat (ahab's) did not escape. agreat rolling sea, dashing high up against the reeling ship's highteetering side, stove in the boat's bottom at the stern, and left itagain, all dripping through like a sieve."bad work, bad work! mr. starbuck," said stubb, regarding the wreck,"but the sea will have its way. stubb, for one, can't fight it. yousee, mr. starbuck, a wave has such a great long start before it leaps,all round the world it runs, and then comes the spring! but as for me,all the start i have to meet it, is just across the deck here. but nevermind; it's all in fun: so the old song says;"_(sings.) oh! jolly is the gale, and a joker is the whale, a' flourishin' his tail,_ such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the ocean, oh! the scud all a flyin', that's his flip only foamin'; when he stirs in the spicin',_ such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the ocean, oh! thunder splits the ships, but he only smacks his lips, a tastin' of this flip,_ such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the ocean, oh!"avast stubb," cried starbuck, "let the typhoon sing, and strikehis harp here in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt holdthy peace.""but i am not a brave man; never said i was a brave man; i am acoward; and i sing to keep up my spirits. and i tell you what it is, mr.starbuck, there's no way to stop my singing in this world but to cutmy throat. and when that's done, ten to one i sing ye the doxology fora wind-up.""madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.""what! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, nevermind how foolish?""here!" cried starbuck, seizing stubb by the shoulder, and pointinghis hand towards the weather bow, "markest thou not that the galecomes from the eastward, the very course ahab is to run for moby dick?the very course he swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there;where is that stove? in the stern-sheets, man; where he is wont tostand_his stand-point is stove, man! now jump overboard, and singaway, if thou must!"i don't half understand ye: what's in the wind?""yes, yes, round the cape of good hope is the shortest way tonantucket," soliloquized starbuck suddenly, heedless of stubb'squestion. "the gale that now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn itinto a fair wind that will drive us towards home. yonder, to windward,all is blackness of doom; but to leeward, homeward_i see it lightensup there; but not with the lightning."at that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, followingthe flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the sameinstant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead."who's there?""old thunder!" said ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to hispivot-hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowedlances of fire.now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry offthe perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea someships carry to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. butas this conductor must descend to considerable depth, that its end mayavoid all contact with the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantlytowing there, it would be liable to many mishaps, besides interferingnot a little with some of the rigging, and more or less impeding thevessel's way in the water; because of all this, the lower parts of aship's lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are generally madein long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up into thechains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require."the rods! the rods!" cried starbuck to the crew, suddenlyadmonished to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just beendarting flambeaux, to light ahab to his post. "are they overboard?drop them over, fore and aft. quick!""avast!" cried ahab; "let's have fair play here, though we bethe weaker side. yet i'll contribute to raise rods on the himmalehsand andes, that all the world may be secured; but out on privileges! letthem be, sir.""look aloft!" cried starbuck. "the corpusants! the corpusants!"all the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at eachtri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each ofthe three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, likethree gigantic wax tapers before an altar."blast the boat! let it go!" cried stubb at this instant, as aswashing sea heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwaleviolently jammed his hand, as he was passing a lashing. "blastit!"_but slipping backward on the deck, his uplifted eyes caught theflames; and immediately shifting his tone he cried_"the corpusantshave mercy on us all!"to sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance ofthe calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate cursesfrom the topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seethingsea; but in all my voyagings, seldom have i heard a common oath whengod's burning finger has been laid on the ship; when his "mene,mene, tekel upharsin" has been woven into the shrouds and the cordage.while this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from theenchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle,all their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far awayconstellation of stars. relieved against the ghostly light, the giganticjet negro, daggoo, loomed up to thrice his real stature, and seemedthe black cloud from which the thunder had come. the parted mouth oftashtego revealed his shark-white teeth, which strangely gleamed asif they too had been tipped by corpusants; while lit up by thepreternatural light, queequeg's tattooing burned like satanic blueflames on his body.the tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once morethe pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. a momentor two passed, when starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one. itwas stubb. "what thinkest thou now, man; i heard thy cry; it was notthe same in the song.""no, no, it wasn't; i said the corpusants have mercy on us all;and i hope they will, still. but do they only have mercy onlong faces?_have they no bowels for a laugh? and look ye, mr.starbuck_but it's too dark to look. hear me, then: i take thatmast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for those masts arerooted in a hold that is going to be chock a' block with sperm-oil,d'ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, likesap in a tree. yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceticandles_that's the good promise we saw."at that moment starbuck caught sight of stubb's face slowly beginningto glimmer into sight. glancing upwards, he cried: "see! see!"and once more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemedredoubled supernaturalness in their pallor."the corpusants have mercy on us all," cried stubb, again.at the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame,the parsee was kneeling in ahab's front, but with his head bowed awayfrom him; while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, wherethey had just been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen,arrested by the glare, now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like aknot of numbed wasps from a drooping, orchard twig. in various enchantedattitudes, like the standing, or stepping, or running skeletons inherculaneum, others remained rooted to the deck; but all their eyesupcast."aye, aye, men!" cried ahab. "look up at it; mark it well;the white flame but lights the way to the white whale! hand me thosemainmast links there; i would fain feel this pulse, and let mine beatagainst it; blood against fire! so."then turning_the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his footupon the parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm, hestood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames."oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas i as persianonce did worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that tothis hour i bear the scar; i now know thee, thou clear spirit, and i nowknow that thy right worship is defiance. to neither love nor reverencewilt thou be kind; and e'en for hate thou canst but kill; and allare killed. no fearless fool now fronts thee. i own thy speechless,placeless power; but to the last gasp of my earthquake life willdispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in me. in the midst of thepersonified impersonal, a personality stands here. though but a pointat best; whencesoe'er i came; wheresoe'er i go; yet while i earthlylive, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal rights.but war is pain, and hate is woe. come in thy lowest form of love, andi will kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere supernalpower; and though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds,there's that in here that still remains indifferent. oh, thou clearspirit, of thy fire thou madest me, and like a true child of fire, ibreathe it back to thee."_sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap lengthwiseto thrice their previous height; ahab, with the rest, closes his eyes,his right hand pressed hard upon them._"i own thy speechless, placeless power; said i not so? nor was itwrung from me; nor do i now drop these links. thou canst blind; but ican then grope. thou canst consume; but i can then be ashes. take thehomage of these poor eyes, and shutter-hands. i would not take it. thelightning flashes through my skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; mywhole beaten brain seems as beheaded, and rolling on some stunningground. oh, oh! yet blindfold, yet will i talk to thee. light thoughthou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but i am darkness leaping out oflight, leaping out of thee! the javelins cease; open eyes; see, ornot? there burn the flames! oh, thou magnanimous! now i do glory in mygenealogy. but thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, i knownot. oh, cruel! what hast thou done with her? there lies my puzzle; butthine is greater. thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyselfunbegotten; certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyselfunbegun. i know that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thouomnipotent. there is some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clearspirit, to whom all thy eternity is but time, all thy creativenessmechanical. through thee, thy flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimlysee it. oh, thou foundling fire, thou hermit immemorial, thou too hastthy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated grief. here again withhaughty agony, i read my sire. leap! leap up, and lick the sky! i leapwith thee; i burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee; defyingly iworship thee!""the boat! the boat!" cried starbuck, "look at thy boat, oldman!"ahab's harpoon, the one forged at perth's fire, remained firmlylashed in its conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond hiswhale-boat's bow; but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused theloose leather sheath to drop off; and from the keen steel barb there nowcame a levelled flame of pale, forked fire. as the silent harpoonburned there like a serpent's tongue, starbuck grasped ahab by thearm_"god, god is against thee, old man; forbear! _tis an illvoyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while we may,old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyagethan this."overhearing starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to thebraces_though not a sail was left aloft. for the moment all the aghastmate's thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. butdashing the rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching theburning harpoon, ahab waved it like a torch among them; swearing totransfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope's end.petrified by his aspect, and still more shrinking from the fiery dartthat he held, the men fell back in dismay, and ahab again spoke:_"all your oaths to hunt the white whale are as binding as mine; andheart, soul, and body, lungs and life, old ahab is bound. and that yemay know to what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus i blow outthe last fear!" and with one blast of his breath he extinguished theflame.as in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood ofsome lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it somuch the more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts;so at those last words of ahab's many of the mariners did run from himin a terror of dismay.chapter 120. the deck towards the end of the first night watch. ahabstanding by the helm. starbuck approaching him."we must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. the band is workingloose and the lee lift is half-stranded. shall i strike it, sir?""strike nothing; lash it. if i had sky-sail poles, i'd sway them upnow.""sir!_in god's name!_sir?""well.""the anchors are working, sir. shall i get them inboard?""strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. the windrises, but it has not got up to my table-lands yet. quick, and see toit._by masts and keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper ofsome coasting smack. send down my main-top-sail yard! ho, gluepots!loftiest trucks were made for wildest winds, and this brain-truck ofmine now sails amid the cloud-scud. shall i strike that? oh, none butcowards send down their brain-trucks in tempest time. what a hoorooshaloft there! i would e'en take it for sublime, did i not know that thecolic is a noisy malady. oh, take medicine, take medicine!"chapter 121. midnight._the forecastle bulwarks.stubb and flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings overthe anchors there hanging."no, stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, butyou will never pound into me what you were just now saying. and how longago is it since you said the very contrary? didn't you once say thatwhatever ship ahab sails in, that ship should pay something extra on itsinsurance policy, just as though it were loaded with powder barrels aftand boxes of lucifers forward? stop, now; didn't you say so?""well, suppose i did? what then? i've part changed my flesh sincethat time, why not my mind? besides, supposing we are loaded with powderbarrels aft and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers getafire in this drenching spray here? why, my little man, you have prettyred hair, but you couldn't get afire now. shake yourself; you'reaquarius, or the water-bearer, flask; might fill pitchers at your coatcollar. don't you see, then, that for these extra risks the marineinsurance companies have extra guarantees? here are hydrants, flask. buthark, again, and i'll answer ye the other thing. first take your legoff from the crown of the anchor here, though, so i can pass the rope;now listen. what's the mighty difference between holding a mast'slightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast thathasn't got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? don't you see, youtimber-head, that no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless themast is first struck? what are you talking about, then? not one ship ina hundred carries rods, and ahab,_aye, man, and all of us,_werein no more danger then, in my poor opinion, than all the crews in tenthousand ships now sailing the seas. why, you king-post, you, isuppose you would have every man in the world go about with a smalllightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militiaofficer's skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. whydon't ye be sensible, flask? it's easy to be sensible; why don'tye, then? any man with half an eye can be sensible.""i don't know that, stubb. you sometimes find it rather hard.""yes, when a fellow's soaked through, it's hard to be sensible,that's a fact. and i am about drenched with this spray. never mind;catch the turn there, and pass it. seems to me we are lashing down theseanchors now as if they were never going to be used again. tying thesetwo anchors here, flask, seems like tying a man's hands behind him.and what big generous hands they are, to be sure. these are your ironfists, hey? what a hold they have, too! i wonder, flask, whether theworld is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an uncommon longcable, though. there, hammer that knot down, and we've done. so; nextto touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. i say, justwring out my jacket skirts, will ye? thank ye. they laugh at long-togsso, flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always to be wornin all storms afloat. the tails tapering down that way, serve tocarry off the water, d'ye see. same with cocked hats; the cocks formgable-end eave-troughs, flask. no more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins forme; i must mount a swallow-tail, and drive down a beaver; so. halloa!whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard; lord, lord, that the winds thatcome from heaven should be so unmannerly! this is a nasty night, lad."chapter 122. midnight aloft._thunder and lightning.the main-top-sail yard._tashtego passing new lashings around it."um, um, um. stop that thunder! plenty too much thunder up here.what's the use of thunder? um, um, um. we don't want thunder; wewant rum; give us a glass of rum. um, um, um!"chapter 123. the musket.during the most violent shocks of the typhoon, the man at the pequod'sjaw-bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck byits spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attachedto it_for they were slack_because some play to the tiller wasindispensable.in a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecockto the blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in thecompasses, at intervals, go round and round. it was thus with thepequod's; at almost every shock the helmsman had not failed to noticethe whirling velocity with which they revolved upon the cards; it isa sight that hardly anyone can behold without some sort of unwontedemotion.some hours after midnight, the typhoon abated so much, that through thestrenuous exertions of starbuck and stubb_one engaged forward and theother aft_the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sailswere cut adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, likethe feathers of an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds whenthat storm-tossed bird is on the wing.the three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and astorm-trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went throughthe water with some precision again; and the course_for the present,east-south-east_which he was to steer, if practicable, was once moregiven to the helmsman. for during the violence of the gale, he had onlysteered according to its vicissitudes. but as he was now bringing theship as near her course as possible, watching the compass meanwhile, lo!a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern; aye, the foul breezebecame fair!instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of "ho! thefair wind! oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!" the crew singing for joy, thatso promising an event should so soon have falsified the evil portentspreceding it.in compliance with the standing order of his commander_to reportimmediately, and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided changein the affairs of the deck,_starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yardsto the breeze_however reluctantly and gloomily,_than he mechanicallywent below to apprise captain ahab of the circumstance.ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it amoment. the cabin lamp_taking long swings this way and that_wasburning fitfully, and casting fitful shadows upon the old man'sbolted door,_a thin one, with fixed blinds inserted, in place ofupper panels. the isolated subterraneousness of the cabin made a certainhumming silence to reign there, though it was hooped round by all theroar of the elements. the loaded muskets in the rack were shininglyrevealed, as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead. starbuckwas an honest, upright man; but out of starbuck's heart, at thatinstant when he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evilthought; but so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that forthe instant he hardly knew it for itself."he would have shot me once," he murmured, "yes, there's thevery musket that he pointed at me;_that one with the studded stock;let me touch it_lift it. strange, that i, who have handled so manydeadly lances, strange, that i should shake so now. loaded? i mustsee. aye, aye; and powder in the pan;_that's not good. best spillit?_wait. i'll cure myself of this. i'll hold the musket boldlywhile i think._i come to report a fair wind to him. but how fair? fairfor death and doom,_that's fair for moby dick. it's a fair windthat's only fair for that accursed fish._the very tube he pointed atme!_the very one; this one_i hold it here; he would have killed mewith the very thing i handle now._aye and he would fain kill all hiscrew. does he not say he will not strike his spars to any gale? hashe not dashed his heavenly quadrant? and in these same perilous seas,gropes he not his way by mere dead reckoning of the error-aboundinglog? and in this very typhoon, did he not swear that he would have nolightning-rods? but shall this crazed old man be tamely suffered to draga whole ship's company down to doom with him?_yes, it would makehim the wilful murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come to anydeadly harm; and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will,if ahab have his way. if, then, he were this instant_put aside, thatcrime would not be his. ha! is he muttering in his sleep? yes, justthere,_in there, he's sleeping. sleeping? aye, but still alive,and soon awake again. i can't withstand thee, then, old man. notreasoning; not remonstrance; not entreaty wilt thou hearken to; all thisthou scornest. flat obedience to thy own flat commands, this is all thoubreathest. aye, and say'st the men have vow'd thy vow; say'stall of us are ahabs. great god forbid!_but is there no other way? nolawful way?_make him a prisoner to be taken home? what! hope to wrestthis old man's living power from his own living hands? only a foolwould try it. say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropesand hawsers; chained down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he wouldbe more hideous than a caged tiger, then. i could not endure thesight; could not possibly fly his howlings; all comfort, sleep itself,inestimable reason would leave me on the long intolerable voyage. what,then, remains? the land is hundreds of leagues away, and locked japanthe nearest. i stand alone here upon an open sea, with two oceans and awhole continent between me and law._aye, aye, _tis so._is heavena murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed,tindering sheets and skin together?_and would i be a murderer, then,if"_and slowly, stealthily, and half sideways looking, he placed theloaded musket's end against the door."on this level, ahab's hammock swings within; his head this way. atouch, and starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again._ohmary! mary!_boy! boy! boy!_but if i wake thee not to death, old man,who can tell to what unsounded deeps starbuck's body this day weekmay sink, with all the crew! great god, where art thou? shall i? shalli?_the wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the fore and main topsailsare reefed and set; she heads her course.""stern all! oh moby dick, i clutch thy heart at last!"such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man'stormented sleep, as if starbuck's voice had caused the long dumb dreamto speak.the yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard's arm against the panel;starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, heplaced the death-tube in its rack, and left the place."he's too sound asleep, mr. stubb; go thou down, and wake him, andtell him. i must see to the deck here. thou know'st what to say."chapter 124. the needle.next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows ofmighty bulk, and striving in the pequod's gurgling track, pushedher on like giants' palms outspread. the strong, unstaggering breezeabounded so, that sky and air seemed vast outbellying sails; the wholeworld boomed before the wind. muffled in the full morning light, theinvisible sun was only known by the spread intensity of his place;where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks. emblazonings, as of crownedbabylonian kings and queens, reigned over everything. the sea was as acrucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps with light and heat.long maintaining an enchanted silence, ahab stood apart; and every timethe tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to eyethe bright sun's rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly settledby the stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun's rearward place, andhow the same yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake."ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariotof the sun. ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, i bring the sun toye! yoke on the further billows; hallo! a tandem, i drive the sea!"but suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards thehelm, huskily demanding how the ship was heading."east-sou-east, sir," said the frightened steersman."thou liest!" smiting him with his clenched fist. "heading east atthis hour in the morning, and the sun astern?"upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just thenobserved by ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its veryblinding palpableness must have been the cause.thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, ahab caught one glimpseof the compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almostseemed to stagger. standing behind him starbuck looked, and lo! the twocompasses pointed east, and the pequod was as infallibly going west.but ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, theold man with a rigid laugh exclaimed, "i have it! it hashappened before. mr. starbuck, last night's thunder turned ourcompasses_that's all. thou hast before now heard of such a thing, itake it.""aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir," said the palemate, gloomily.here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more thanone case occurred to ships in violent storms. the magnetic energy, asdeveloped in the mariner's needle, is, as all know, essentiallyone with the electricity beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be muchmarvelled at, that such things should be. instances where the lightninghas actually struck the vessel, so as to smite down some of the sparsand rigging, the effect upon the needle has at times been still morefatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so that the beforemagnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife's knitting needle.but in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers theoriginal virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses beaffected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship;even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointedcompasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now tookthe precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles wereexactly inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship's course to bechanged accordingly. the yards were hard up; and once more the pequodthrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fairone had only been juggling her.meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, starbuck said nothing,but quietly he issued all requisite orders; while stubb and flask_whoin some small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings_likewiseunmurmuringly acquiesced. as for the men, though some of them lowlyrumbled, their fear of ahab was greater than their fear of fate. but asever before, the pagan harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed;or if impressed, it was only with a certain magnetism shot into theircongenial hearts from inflexible ahab's.for a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. butchancing to slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed coppersight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck."thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun's pilot! yesterday i wreckedthee, and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. so, so.but ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet. mr. starbuck_a lancewithout a pole; a top-maul, and the smallest of the sail-maker'sneedles. quick!"accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now aboutto do, were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been torevive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in amatter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses. besides, the oldman well knew that to steer by transpointed needles, though clumsilypracticable, was not a thing to be passed over by superstitious sailors,without some shudderings and evil portents."men," said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handedhim the things he had demanded, "my men, the thunder turned oldahab's needles; but out of this bit of steel ahab can make one of hisown, that will point as true as any."abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as thiswas said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic mightfollow. but starbuck looked away.with a blow from the top-maul ahab knocked off the steel head of thelance, and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, badehim hold it upright, without its touching the deck. then, with the maul,after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he placed theblunted needle endwise on the top of it, and less strongly hammeredthat, several times, the mate still holding the rod as before. thengoing through some small strange motions with it_whether indispensableto the magnetizing of the steel, or merely intended to augment the aweof the crew, is uncertain_he called for linen thread; and movingto the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles there, andhorizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of thecompass-cards. at first, the steel went round and round, quivering andvibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when ahab,who had been intently watching for this result, stepped franklyback from the binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it,exclaimed,_"look ye, for yourselves, if ahab be not lord of thelevel loadstone! the sun is east, and that compass swears it!"one after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes couldpersuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunkaway.in his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw ahab in all hisfatal pride.chapter 125. the log and line.while now the fated pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the logand line had but very seldom been in use. owing to a confident relianceupon other means of determining the vessel's place, some merchantmen,and many whalemen, especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave thelog; though at the same time, and frequently more for form's sakethan anything else, regularly putting down upon the customary slatethe course steered by the ship, as well as the presumed average rateof progression every hour. it had been thus with the pequod. the woodenreel and angular log attached hung, long untouched, just beneath therailing of the after bulwarks. rains and spray had damped it; sun andwind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing thathung so idly. but heedless of all this, his mood seized ahab, as hehappened to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet scene,and he remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his franticoath about the level log and line. the ship was sailing plungingly;astern the billows rolled in riots."forward, there! heave the log!"two seamen came. the golden-hued tahitian and the grizzly manxman."take the reel, one of ye, i'll heave."they went towards the extreme stern, on the ship's lee side, where thedeck, with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping intothe creamy, sidelong-rushing sea.the manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projectinghandle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, sostood with the angular log hanging downwards, till ahab advanced to him.ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or fortyturns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the oldmanxman, who was intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold tospeak."sir, i mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet havespoiled it.""_twill hold, old gentleman. long heat and wet, have they spoiledthee? thou seem'st to hold. or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; notthou it.""i hold the spool, sir. but just as my captain says. with these greyhairs of mine _tis not worth while disputing, _specially with asuperior, who'll ne'er confess.""what's that? there now's a patched professor in queen nature'sgranite-founded college; but methinks he's too subservient. where wertthou born?""in the little rocky isle of man, sir.""excellent! thou'st hit the world by that.""i know not, sir, but i was born there.""in the isle of man, hey? well, the other way, it's good. here'sa man from man; a man born in once independent man, and now unmannedof man; which is sucked in_by what? up with the reel! the dead, blindwall butts all inquiring heads at last. up with it! so."the log was heaved. the loose coils rapidly straightened out in a longdragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. inturn, jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towingresistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely."hold hard!"snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the tugginglog was gone."i crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the madsea parts the log-line. but ahab can mend all. haul in here, tahitian;reel up, manxman. and look ye, let the carpenter make another log, andmend thou the line. see to it.""there he goes now; to him nothing's happened; but to me, theskewer seems loosening out of the middle of the world. haul in, haul in,tahitian! these lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, anddragging slow. ha, pip? come to help; eh, pip?""pip? whom call ye pip? pip jumped from the whale-boat. pip'smissing. let's see now if ye haven't fished him up here, fisherman.it drags hard; i guess he's holding on. jerk him, tahiti! jerk himoff; we haul in no cowards here. ho! there's his arm just breakingwater. a hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off_we haul in no cowards here.captain ahab! sir, sir! here's pip, trying to get on board again.""peace, thou crazy loon," cried the manxman, seizing him by the arm."away from the quarter-deck!""the greater idiot ever scolds the lesser," muttered ahab,advancing. "hands off from that holiness! where sayest thou pip was,boy?"astern there, sir, astern! lo! lo!""and who art thou, boy? i see not my reflection in the vacant pupilsof thy eyes. oh god! that man should be a thing for immortal souls tosieve through! who art thou, boy?""bell-boy, sir; ship's-crier; ding, dong, ding! pip! pip! pip!one hundred pounds of clay reward for pip; five feet high_lookscowardly_quickest known by that! ding, dong, ding! who's seen pipthe coward?""there can be no hearts above the snow-line. oh, ye frozen heavens!look down here. ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandonedhim, ye creative libertines. here, boy; ahab's cabin shall be pip'shome henceforth, while ahab lives. thou touchest my inmost centre, boy;thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings. come, let'sdown.""what's this? here's velvet shark-skin," intently gazing atahab's hand, and feeling it. "ah, now, had poor pip but felt so kinda thing as this, perhaps he had ne'er been lost! this seems to me,sir, as a man-rope; something that weak souls may hold by. oh, sir, letold perth now come and rivet these two hands together; the black onewith the white, for i will not let this go.""oh, boy, nor will i thee, unless i should thereby drag thee to worsehorrors than are here. come, then, to my cabin. lo! ye believers ingods all goodness, and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient godsoblivious of suffering man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing notwhat he does, yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude. come!i feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand, than though i grasped anemperor's!""there go two daft ones now," muttered the old manxman. "one daftwith strength, the other daft with weakness. but here's the end of therotten line_all dripping, too. mend it, eh? i think we had best have anew line altogether. i'll see mr. stubb about it."chapter 126. the life-buoy.steering now south-eastward by ahab's levelled steel, and her progresssolely determined by ahab's level log and line; the pequod held onher path towards the equator. making so long a passage through suchunfrequented waters, descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways impelledby unvarying trade winds, over waves monotonously mild; all these seemedthe strange calm things preluding some riotous and desperate scene.at last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of theequatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before thedawn, was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch_thenheaded by flask_was startled by a cry so plaintively wild andunearthly_like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of allherod's murdered innocents_that one and all, they started from theirreveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or sat, or leaned alltransfixedly listening, like the carved roman slave, while that wildcry remained within hearing. the christian or civilized part of the crewsaid it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers remainedunappalled. yet the grey manxman_the oldest mariner of all_declaredthat the wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the voices of newlydrowned men in the sea.below in his hammock, ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, whenhe came to the deck; it was then recounted to him by flask, notunaccompanied with hinted dark meanings. he hollowly laughed, and thusexplained the wonder.those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbersof seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or some damsthat had lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and kept companywith her, crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail. but thisonly the more affected some of them, because most mariners cherish avery superstitious feeling about seals, arising not only from theirpeculiar tones when in distress, but also from the human look of theirround heads and semi-intelligent faces, seen peeringly uprising fromthe water alongside. in the sea, under certain circumstances, seals havemore than once been mistaken for men.but the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausibleconfirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. atsun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore;and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (forsailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state), whether it was thuswith the man, there is now no telling; but, be that as it may, hehad not been long at his perch, when a cry was heard_a cry and arushing_and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in the air; andlooking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue of thesea.the life-buoy_a long slender cask_was dropped from the stern, whereit always hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seizeit, and the sun having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so thatit slowly filled, and that parched wood also filled at its every pore;and the studded iron-bound cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as ifto yield him his pillow, though in sooth but a hard one.and thus the first man of the pequod that mounted the mast to look outfor the white whale, on the white whale's own peculiar ground; thatman was swallowed up in the deep. but few, perhaps, thought of that atthe time. indeed, in some sort, they were not grieved at this event, atleast as a portent; for they regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of evilin the future, but as the fulfilment of an evil already presaged. theydeclared that now they knew the reason of those wild shrieks they hadheard the night before. but again the old manxman said nay.the lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; starbuck was directed to seeto it; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and asin the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis ofthe voyage, all hands were impatient of any toil but what was directlyconnected with its final end, whatever that might prove to be;therefore, they were going to leave the ship's stern unprovided with abuoy, when by certain strange signs and inuendoes queequeg hinted a hintconcerning his coffin."a life-buoy of a coffin!" cried starbuck, starting."rather queer, that, i should say," said stubb."it will make a good enough one," said flask, "the carpenter herecan arrange it easily.""bring it up; there's nothing else for it," said starbuck, aftera melancholy pause. "rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so_thecoffin, i mean. dost thou hear me? rig it.""and shall i nail down the lid, sir?" moving his hand as with ahammer."aye.""and shall i caulk the seams, sir?" moving his hand as with acaulking-iron."aye.""and shall i then pay over the same with pitch, sir?" moving hishand as with a pitch-pot."away! what possesses thee to this? make a life-buoy of the coffin,and no more._mr. stubb, mr. flask, come forward with me.""he goes off in a huff. the whole he can endure; at the parts hebaulks. now i don't like this. i make a leg for captain ahab, and hewears it like a gentleman; but i make a bandbox for queequeg, and hewon't put his head into it. are all my pains to go for nothing withthat coffin? and now i'm ordered to make a life-buoy of it. it'slike turning an old coat; going to bring the flesh on the other sidenow. i don't like this cobbling sort of business_i don't like itat all; it's undignified; it's not my place. let tinkers' brats dotinkerings; we are their betters. i like to take in hand none but clean,virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularlybegins at the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes toan end at the conclusion; not a cobbler's job, that's at an end inthe middle, and at the beginning at the end. it's the old woman'stricks to be giving cobbling jobs. lord! what an affection all old womenhave for tinkers. i know an old woman of sixty-five who ran away witha bald-headed young tinker once. and that's the reason i never wouldwork for lonely widow old women ashore, when i kept my job-shop in thevineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads to runoff with me. but heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps.let me see. nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same withpitch; batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over theship's stern. were ever such things done before with a coffin? somesuperstitious old carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, erethey would do the job. but i'm made of knotty aroostook hemlock; idon't budge. cruppered with a coffin! sailing about with a grave-yardtray! but never mind. we workers in woods make bridal-bedsteads andcard-tables, as well as coffins and hearses. we work by the month, orby the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the why and wherefore ofour work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then we stash it ifwe can. hem! i'll do the job, now, tenderly. i'll have me_let'ssee_how many in the ship's company, all told? but i've forgotten.any way, i'll have me thirty separate, turk's-headed life-lines,each three feet long hanging all round to the coffin. then, if thehull go down, there'll be thirty lively fellows all fighting forone coffin, a sight not seen very often beneath the sun! come hammer,caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike! let's to it."chapter 127. the deck.the coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the openhatchway; the carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted oakumslowly unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of hisfrock._ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears pipfollowing him."back, lad; i will be with ye again presently. he goes! not this handcomplies with my humor more genially than that boy._middle aisle of achurch! what's here?""life-buoy, sir. mr. starbuck's orders. oh, look, sir! beware thehatchway!""thank ye, man. thy coffin lies handy to the vault.""sir? the hatchway? oh! so it does, sir, so it does.""art not thou the leg-maker? look, did not this stump come from thyshop?""i believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?""well enough. but art thou not also the undertaker?""aye, sir; i patched up this thing here as a coffin for queequeg; butthey've set me now to turning it into something else.""then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and thenext day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of thosesame coffins? thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of ajack-of-all-trades.""but i do not mean anything, sir. i do as i do.""the gods again. hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about acoffin? the titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out thecraters for volcanoes; and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade inhand. dost thou never?""sing, sir? do i sing? oh, i'm indifferent enough, sir, for that;but the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been becausethere was none in his spade, sir. but the caulking mallet is full of it.hark to it.""aye, and that's because the lid there's a sounding-board; andwhat in all things makes the sounding-board is this_there's naughtbeneath. and yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same,carpenter. hast thou ever helped carry a bier, and heard the coffinknock against the churchyard gate, going in?"faith, sir, i've_""faith? what's that?""why, faith, sir, it's only a sort of exclamation-like_that'sall, sir.""um, um; go on.""i was about to say, sir, that_""art thou a silk-worm? dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?look at thy bosom! despatch! and get these traps out of sight.""he goes aft. that was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden inhot latitudes. i've heard that the isle of albemarle, one of thegallipagos, is cut by the equator right in the middle. seems to mesome sort of equator cuts yon old man, too, right in his middle. he'salways under the line_fiery hot, i tell ye! he's looking thisway_come, oakum; quick. here we go again. this wooden mallet is thecork, and i'm the professor of musical glasses_tap, tap!"(ahab to himself.)"there's a sight! there's a sound! the grey-headed woodpeckertapping the hollow tree! blind and dumb might well be envied now. see!that thing rests on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. a most maliciouswag, that fellow. rat-tat! so man's seconds tick! oh! how immaterialare all materials! what things real are there, but imponderablethoughts? here now's the very dreaded symbol of grim death, by a merehap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope of most endangeredlife. a life-buoy of a coffin! does it go further? can it be thatin some spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but animmortality-preserver! i'll think of that. but no. so far gone am i inthe dark side of earth, that its other side, the theoretic bright one,seems but uncertain twilight to me. will ye never have done, carpenter,with that accursed sound? i go below; let me not see that thing herewhen i return again. now, then, pip, we'll talk this over; i do suckmost wondrous philosophies from thee! some unknown conduits from theunknown worlds must empty into thee!"chapter 128. the pequod meets the rachel.next day, a large ship, the rachel, was descried, bearing directly downupon the pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. at thetime the pequod was making good speed through the water; but as thebroad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails allfell together as blank bladders that are burst, and all life fled fromthe smitten hull."bad news; she brings bad news," muttered the old manxman. but ereher commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere hecould hopefully hail, ahab's voice was heard."hast seen the white whale?""aye, yesterday. have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?"throttling his joy, ahab negatively answered this unexpected question;and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger captainhimself, having stopped his vessel's way, was seen descending herside. a few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the pequod'smain-chains, and he sprang to the deck. immediately he was recognised byahab for a nantucketer he knew. but no formal salutation was exchanged."where was he?_not killed!_not killed!" cried ahab, closelyadvancing. "how was it?"it seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous, whilethree of the stranger's boats were engaged with a shoal of whales,which had led them some four or five miles from the ship; and while theywere yet in swift chase to windward, the white hump and head of mobydick had suddenly loomed up out of the water, not very far to leeward;whereupon, the fourth rigged boat_a reserved one_had been instantlylowered in chase. after a keen sail before the wind, this fourthboat_the swiftest keeled of all_seemed to have succeeded infastening_at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tellanything about it. in the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat;and then a swift gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothingmore; whence it was concluded that the stricken whale must haveindefinitely run away with his pursuers, as often happens. there wassome apprehension, but no positive alarm, as yet. the recall signalswere placed in the rigging; darkness came on; and forced to pick up herthree far to windward boats_ere going in quest of the fourth onein the precisely opposite direction_the ship had not only beennecessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but,for the time, to increase her distance from it. but the rest of hercrew being at last safe aboard, she crowded all sail_stunsail onstunsail_after the missing boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots fora beacon; and every other man aloft on the look-out. but though when shehad thus sailed a sufficient distance to gain the presumed place of theabsent ones when last seen; though she then paused to lower her spareboats to pull all around her; and not finding anything, had againdashed on; again paused, and lowered her boats; and though she had thuscontinued doing till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the missingkeel had been seen.the story told, the stranger captain immediately went on to reveal hisobject in boarding the pequod. he desired that ship to unite with hisown in the search; by sailing over the sea some four or five milesapart, on parallel lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were."i will wager something now," whispered stubb to flask, "that someone in that missing boat wore off that captain's best coat; mayhap,his watch_he's so cursed anxious to get it back. who ever heardof two pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat inthe height of the whaling season? see, flask, only see how pale helooks_pale in the very buttons of his eyes_look_it wasn't thecoat_it must have been the_""my boy, my own boy is among them. for god's sake_i beg, iconjure"_here exclaimed the stranger captain to ahab, who thus farhad but icily received his petition. "for eight-and-forty hours letme charter your ship_i will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay forit_if there be no other way_for eight-and-forty hours only_onlythat_you must, oh, you must, and you shall do this thing.""his son!" cried stubb, "oh, it's his son he's lost! i takeback the coat and watch_what says ahab? we must save that boy.""he's drowned with the rest on _em, last night," said the oldmanx sailor standing behind them; "i heard; all of ye heard theirspirits."now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the rachel'sthe more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one ofthe captain's sons among the number of the missing boat's crew; butamong the number of the other boat's crews, at the same time, but onthe other hand, separated from the ship during the dark vicissitudesof the chase, there had been still another son; as that for a time, thewretched father was plunged to the bottom of the cruellest perplexity;which was only solved for him by his chief mate's instinctivelyadopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such emergencies,that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats, alwaysto pick up the majority first. but the captain, for some unknownconstitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, andnot till forced to it by ahab's iciness did he allude to his one yetmissing boy; a little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with theearnest but unmisgiving hardihood of a nantucketer's paternal love,had thus early sought to initiate him in the perils and wonders of avocation almost immemorially the destiny of all his race. nor does itunfrequently occur, that nantucket captains will send a son of suchtender age away from them, for a protracted three or four years'voyage in some other ship than their own; so that their first knowledgeof a whaleman's career shall be unenervated by any chance display ofa father's natural but untimely partiality, or undue apprehensivenessand concern.meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of ahab;and ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but withoutthe least quivering of his own."i will not go," said the stranger, "till you say aye to me. do tome as you would have me do to you in the like case. for you too havea boy, captain ahab_though but a child, and nestling safely athome now_a child of your old age too_yes, yes, you relent; i seeit_run, run, men, now, and stand by to square in the yards.""avast," cried ahab_"touch not a rope-yarn"; then in a voicethat prolongingly moulded every word_"captain gardiner, i will notdo it. even now i lose time. good-bye, good-bye. god bless ye, man, andmay i forgive myself, but i must go. mr. starbuck, look at the binnaclewatch, and in three minutes from this present instant warn off allstrangers: then brace forward again, and let the ship sail as before."hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin,leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utterrejection of his so earnest suit. but starting from his enchantment,gardiner silently hurried to the side; more fell than stepped into hisboat, and returned to his ship.soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vesselwas in view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot,however small, on the sea. this way and that her yards were swung round;starboard and larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat against ahead sea; and again it pushed her before it; while all the while, hermasts and yards were thickly clustered with men, as three tall cherrytrees, when the boys are cherrying among the boughs.but by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly sawthat this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort.she was rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.chapter 129. the cabin.(ahab moving to go on deck; pip catches him by the hand to follow.)"lad, lad, i tell thee thou must not follow ahab now. the hour iscoming when ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have theeby him. there is that in thee, poor lad, which i feel too curing to mymalady. like cures like; and for this hunt, my malady becomes my mostdesired health. do thou abide below here, where they shall serve thee,as if thou wert the captain. aye, lad, thou shalt sit here in my ownscrewed chair; another screw to it, thou must be.""no, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me foryour one lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; i ask no more, so i remain apart of ye.""oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in thefadeless fidelity of man!_and a black! and crazy!_but methinkslike-cures-like applies to him too; he grows so sane again.""they tell me, sir, that stubb did once desert poor little pip, whosedrowned bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin.but i will never desert ye, sir, as stubb did him. sir, i must go withye.""if thou speakest thus to me much more, ahab's purpose keels up inhim. i tell thee no; it cannot be.""oh good master, master, master!"weep so, and i will murder thee! have a care, for ahab too is mad.listen, and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and stillknow that i am there. and now i quit thee. thy hand!_met! true artthou, lad, as the circumference to its centre. so: god for ever blessthee; and if it come to that,_god for ever save thee, let what willbefall."(ahab goes; pip steps one step forward.)"here he this instant stood; i stand in his air,_but i'm alone.now were even poor pip here i could endure it, but he's missing. pip!pip! ding, dong, ding! who's seen pip? he must be up here; let's trythe door. what? neither lock, nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there's noopening it. it must be the spell; he told me to stay here: aye, and toldme this screwed chair was mine. here, then, i'll seat me, against thetransom, in the ship's full middle, all her keel and her three mastsbefore me. here, our old sailors say, in their black seventy-fours greatadmirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of captains andlieutenants. ha! what's this? epaulets! epaulets! the epaulets allcome crowding! pass round the decanters; glad to see ye; fill up,monsieurs! what an odd feeling, now, when a black boy's host to whitemen with gold lace upon their coats!_monsieurs, have ye seen onepip?_a little negro lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly!jumped from a whale-boat once;_seen him? no! well then, fill up again,captains, and let's drink shame upon all cowards! i name nonames. shame upon them! put one foot upon the table. shame upon allcowards._hist! above there, i hear ivory_oh, master! master! i amindeed down-hearted when you walk over me. but here i'll stay, thoughthis stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come tojoin me."chapter 130. the hat.and now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide apreliminary cruise, ahab,_all other whaling waters swept_seemed tohave chased his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securelythere; now, that he found himself hard by the very latitude andlongitude where his tormenting wound had been inflicted; now that avessel had been spoken which on the very day preceding had actuallyencountered moby dick;_and now that all his successive meetings withvarious ships contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac indifferencewith which the white whale tore his hunters, whether sinning or sinnedagainst; now it was that there lurked a something in the old man'seyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. as theunsetting polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months'night sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so ahab's purposenow fixedly gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew.it domineered above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings,fears, were fain to hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth asingle spear or leaf.in this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural,vanished. stubb no more strove to raise a smile; starbuck no more stroveto check one. alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed groundto finest dust, and powdered, for the time, in the clamped mortar ofahab's iron soul. like machines, they dumbly moved about the deck,ever conscious that the old man's despot eye was on them.but did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; whenhe thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen thateven as ahab's eyes so awed the crew's, the inscrutable parsee'sglance awed his; or somehow, at least, in some wild way, at timesaffected it. such an added, gliding strangeness began to invest the thinfedallah now; such ceaseless shudderings shook him; that the men lookeddubious at him; half uncertain, as it seemed, whether indeed he were amortal substance, or else a tremulous shadow cast upon the deck by someunseen being's body. and that shadow was always hovering there. fornot by night, even, had fedallah ever certainly been known to slumber,or go below. he would stand still for hours: but never sat or leaned;his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say_we two watchmen never rest.nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon thedeck, unless ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole,or exactly pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,_themain-mast and the mizen; or else they saw him standing in thecabin-scuttle,_his living foot advanced upon the deck, as if to step;his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that however motionless hestood, however the days and nights were added on, that he had not swungin his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they could nevertell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed attimes; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter, thoughhe stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and theunheeded night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coatand hat. the clothes that the night had wet, the next day's sunshinedried upon him; and so, day after day, and night after night; he went nomore beneath the planks; whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing hesent for.he ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,_breakfastand dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darklygrew all gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which stillgrow idly on at naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. butthough his whole life was now become one watch on deck; and though theparsee's mystic watch was without intermission as his own; yet thesetwo never seemed to speak_one man to the other_unless at longintervals some passing unmomentous matter made it necessary. though sucha potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain; openly, and to theawe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. if by day they chancedto speak one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as concernedthe slightest verbal interchange. at times, for longest hours, withouta single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; ahab in hisscuttle, the parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon eachother; as if in the parsee ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in ahab theparsee his abandoned substance.and yet, somehow, did ahab_in his own proper self, as daily, hourly,and every instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,_ahabseemed an independent lord; the parsee but his slave. still again bothseemed yoked together, and an unseen tyrant driving them; the lean shadesiding the solid rib. for be this parsee what he may, all rib and keelwas solid ahab.at the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heardfrom aft,_"man the mast-heads!"_and all through the day, tillafter sunset and after twilight, the same voice every hour, atthe striking of the helmsman's bell, was heard_"what d'yesee?_sharp! sharp!"but when three or four days had slided by, after meeting thechildren-seeking rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniacold man seemed distrustful of his crew's fidelity; at least, of nearlyall except the pagan harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whetherstubb and flask might not willingly overlook the sight he sought. but ifthese suspicions were really his, he sagaciously refrained from verballyexpressing them, however his actions might seem to hint them."i will have the first sight of the whale myself,"_he said."aye! ahab must have the doubloon!" and with his own hands he riggeda nest of basketed bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a singlesheaved block, to secure to the main-mast head, he received the two endsof the downward-reeved rope; and attaching one to his basket prepareda pin for the other end, in order to fasten it at the rail. this done,with that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin, he lookedround upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other; pausing his glancelong upon daggoo, queequeg, tashtego; but shunning fedallah; and thensettling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate, said,_"take therope, sir_i give it into thy hands, starbuck." then arranging hisperson in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him tohis perch, starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; andafterwards stood near it. and thus, with one hand clinging round theroyal mast, ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles,_ahead,astern, this side, and that,_within the wide expanded circle commandedat so great a height.when in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place inthe rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea ishoisted up to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under thesecircumstances, its fastened end on deck is always given in strict chargeto some one man who has the special watch of it. because in such awilderness of running rigging, whose various different relations aloftcannot always be infallibly discerned by what is seen of them at thedeck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are being every few minutescast down from the fastenings, it would be but a natural fatality, if,unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor should by somecarelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping to thesea. so ahab's proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the onlystrange thing about them seemed to be, that starbuck, almost the oneonly man who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in theslightest degree approaching to decision_one of those too, whosefaithfulness on the look-out he had seemed to doubt somewhat;_it wasstrange, that this was the very man he should select for his watchman;freely giving his whole life into such an otherwise distrustedperson's hands.now, the first time ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there tenminutes; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often flyincommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in theselatitudes; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round his headin a maze of untrackably swift circlings. then it darted a thousand feetstraight up into the air; then spiralized downwards, and went eddyingagain round his head.but with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, ahab seemednot to mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have markedit much, it being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the leastheedful eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost everysight."your hat, your hat, sir!" suddenly cried the sicilian seaman, whobeing posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind ahab, thoughsomewhat lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividingthem.but already the sable wing was before the old man's eyes; the longhooked bill at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away withhis prize.an eagle flew thrice round tarquin's head, removing his cap to replaceit, and thereupon tanaquil, his wife, declared that tarquin wouldbe king of rome. but only by the replacing of the cap was that omenaccounted good. ahab's hat was never restored; the wild hawk flew onand on with it; far in advance of the prow: and at last disappeared;while from the point of that disappearance, a minute black spot wasdimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the sea.chapter 131. the pequod meets the delight.the intense pequod sailed on; the rolling waves and days went by; thelife-buoy-coffin still lightly swung; and another ship, most miserablymisnamed the delight, was descried. as she drew nigh, all eyes werefixed upon her broad beams, called shears, which, in some whaling-ships,cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or nine feet; serving tocarry the spare, unrigged, or disabled boats.upon the stranger's shears were beheld the shattered, white ribs, andsome few splintered planks, of what had once been a whale-boat; but younow saw through this wreck, as plainly as you see through the peeled,half-unhinged, and bleaching skeleton of a horse."hast seen the white whale?""look!" replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail; andwith his trumpet he pointed to the wreck."hast killed him?""the harpoon is not yet forged that ever will do that," answered theother, sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on the deck, whose gatheredsides some noiseless sailors were busy in sewing together."not forged!" and snatching perth's levelled iron from the crotch,ahab held it out, exclaiming_"look ye, nantucketer; here in thishand i hold his death! tempered in blood, and tempered by lightning arethese barbs; and i swear to temper them triply in that hot place behindthe fin, where the white whale most feels his accursed life!""then god keep thee, old man_see'st thou that"_pointing tothe hammock_"i bury but one of five stout men, who were alive onlyyesterday; but were dead ere night. only that one i bury; the rest wereburied before they died; you sail upon their tomb." then turning tohis crew_"are ye ready there? place the plank then on the rail, andlift the body; so, then_oh! god"_advancing towards the hammockwith uplifted hands_"may the resurrection and the life_""brace forward! up helm!" cried ahab like lightning to his men.but the suddenly started pequod was not quick enough to escape the soundof the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea; not soquick, indeed, but that some of the flying bubbles might have sprinkledher hull with their ghostly baptism.as ahab now glided from the dejected delight, the strange life-buoyhanging at the pequod's stern came into conspicuous relief."ha! yonder! look yonder, men!" cried a foreboding voice in herwake. "in vain, oh, ye strangers, ye fly our sad burial; ye but turnus your taffrail to show us your coffin!"chapter 132. the symphony.it was a clear steel-blue day. the firmaments of air and sea werehardly separable in that all-pervading azure; only, the pensive air wastransparently pure and soft, with a woman's look, and the robust andman-like sea heaved with long, strong, lingering swells, as samson'schest in his sleep.hither, and thither, on high, glided the snow-white wings of small,unspeckled birds; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air;but to and fro in the deeps, far down in the bottomless blue, rushedmighty leviathans, sword-fish, and sharks; and these were the strong,troubled, murderous thinkings of the masculine sea.but though thus contrasting within, the contrast was only in shades andshadows without; those two seemed one; it was only the sex, as it were,that distinguished them.aloft, like a royal czar and king, the sun seemed giving this gentleair to this bold and rolling sea; even as bride to groom. and at thegirdling line of the horizon, a soft and tremulous motion_most seenhere at the equator_denoted the fond, throbbing trust, the lovingalarms, with which the poor bride gave her bosom away.tied up and twisted; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles; haggardly firmand unyielding; his eyes glowing like coals, that still glow in theashes of ruin; untottering ahab stood forth in the clearness of themorn; lifting his splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl'sforehead of heaven.oh, immortal infancy, and innocency of the azure! invisible wingedcreatures that frolic all round us! sweet childhood of air and sky! howoblivious were ye of old ahab's close-coiled woe! but so have i seenlittle miriam and martha, laughing-eyed elves, heedlessly gambol aroundtheir old sire; sporting with the circle of singed locks which grew onthe marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain.slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle, ahab leaned over the side andwatched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze, the moreand the more that he strove to pierce the profundity. but the lovelyaromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel, for a moment,the cankerous thing in his soul. that glad, happy air, that winsomesky, did at last stroke and caress him; the step-mother world, so longcruel_forbidding_now threw affectionate arms round his stubbornneck, and did seem to joyously sob over him, as if over one, thathowever wilful and erring, she could yet find it in her heart to saveand to bless. from beneath his slouched hat ahab dropped a tear into thesea; nor did all the pacific contain such wealth as that one wee drop.starbuck saw the old man; saw him, how he heavily leaned over the side;and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless sobbing thatstole out of the centre of the serenity around. careful not to touchhim, or be noticed by him, he yet drew near to him, and stood there.ahab turned."starbuck!""sir.""oh, starbuck! it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky. onsuch a day_very much such a sweetness as this_i struck my firstwhale_a boy-harpooneer of eighteen! forty_forty_forty yearsago!_ago! forty years of continual whaling! forty years of privation,and peril, and storm-time! forty years on the pitiless sea! for fortyyears has ahab forsaken the peaceful land, for forty years to make waron the horrors of the deep! aye and yes, starbuck, out of those fortyyears i have not spent three ashore. when i think of this life i haveled; the desolation of solitude it has been; the masoned, walled-townof a captain's exclusiveness, which admits but small entrance to anysympathy from the green country without_oh, weariness! heaviness!guinea-coast slavery of solitary command!_when i think of all this;only half-suspected, not so keenly known to me before_and how forforty years i have fed upon dry salted fare_fit emblem of the drynourishment of my soil!_when the poorest landsman has had fresh fruitto his daily hand, and broken the world's fresh bread to my mouldycrusts_away, whole oceans away, from that young girl-wife i weddedpast fifty, and sailed for cape horn the next day, leaving but one dentin my marriage pillow_wife? wife?_rather a widow with her husbandalive! aye, i widowed that poor girl when i married her, starbuck; andthen, the madness, the frenzy, the boiling blood and the smoking brow,with which, for a thousand lowerings old ahab has furiously, foaminglychased his prey_more a demon than a man!_aye, aye! what a fortyyears' fool_fool_old fool, has old ahab been! why this strife ofthe chase? why weary, and palsy the arm at the oar, and the iron, andthe lance? how the richer or better is ahab now? behold. oh, starbuck!is it not hard, that with this weary load i bear, one poor leg shouldhave been snatched from under me? here, brush this old hair aside; itblinds me, that i seem to weep. locks so grey did never grow but fromout some ashes! but do i look very old, so very, very old, starbuck? ifeel deadly faint, bowed, and humped, as though i were adam, staggeringbeneath the piled centuries since paradise. god! god! god!_crack myheart!_stave my brain!_mockery! mockery! bitter, biting mockery ofgrey hairs, have i lived enough joy to wear ye; and seem and feel thusintolerably old? close! stand close to me, starbuck; let me look intoa human eye; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky; better than togaze upon god. by the green land; by the bright hearth-stone! this isthe magic glass, man; i see my wife and my child in thine eye. no, no;stay on board, on board!_lower not when i do; when branded ahab giveschase to moby dick. that hazard shall not be thine. no, no! not with thefar away home i see in that eye!""oh, my captain! my captain! noble soul! grand old heart, after all!why should any one give chase to that hated fish! away with me! letus fly these deadly waters! let us home! wife and child, too, arestarbuck's_wife and child of his brotherly, sisterly, play-fellowyouth; even as thine, sir, are the wife and child of thy loving,longing, paternal old age! away! let us away!_this instant let mealter the course! how cheerily, how hilariously, o my captain, would webowl on our way to see old nantucket again! i think, sir, they have somesuch mild blue days, even as this, in nantucket.""they have, they have. i have seen them_some summer days in themorning. about this time_yes, it is his noon nap now_the boyvivaciously wakes; sits up in bed; and his mother tells him of me, ofcannibal old me; how i am abroad upon the deep, but will yet come backto dance him again.""_tis my mary, my mary herself! she promised that my boy, everymorning, should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of hisfather's sail! yes, yes! no more! it is done! we head for nantucket!come, my captain, study out the course, and let us away! see, see! theboy's face from the window! the boy's hand on the hill!"but ahab's glance was averted; like a blighted fruit tree he shook,and cast his last, cindered apple to the soil."what is it, what nameless, inscrutable, unearthly thing is it;what cozening, hidden lord and master, and cruel, remorseless emperorcommands me; that against all natural lovings and longings, i so keeppushing, and crowding, and jamming myself on all the time; recklesslymaking me ready to do what in my own proper, natural heart, i durst notso much as dare? is ahab, ahab? is it i, god, or who, that lifts thisarm? but if the great sun move not of himself; but is as an errand-boyin heaven; nor one single star can revolve, but by some invisible power;how then can this one small heart beat; this one small brain thinkthoughts; unless god does that beating, does that thinking, does thatliving, and not i. by heaven, man, we are turned round and round inthis world, like yonder windlass, and fate is the handspike. and allthe time, lo! that smiling sky, and this unsounded sea! look! see yonalbicore! who put it into him to chase and fang that flying-fish? wheredo murderers go, man! who's to doom, when the judge himself is draggedto the bar? but it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky; andthe air smells now, as if it blew from a far-away meadow; they have beenmaking hay somewhere under the slopes of the andes, starbuck, and themowers are sleeping among the new-mown hay. sleeping? aye, toil we howwe may, we all sleep at last on the field. sleep? aye, and rust amidgreenness; as last year's scythes flung down, and left in the half-cutswaths_starbuck!"but blanched to a corpse's hue with despair, the mate had stolen away.ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side; but started attwo reflected, fixed eyes in the water there. fedallah was motionlesslyleaning over the same rail.chapter 133. the chase_first day.that night, in the mid-watch, when the old man_as his wont atintervals_stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned, and wentto his pivot-hole, he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely, snuffingup the sea air as a sagacious ship's dog will, in drawing nigh tosome barbarous isle. he declared that a whale must be near. soon thatpeculiar odor, sometimes to a great distance given forth by theliving sperm whale, was palpable to all the watch; nor was any marinersurprised when, after inspecting the compass, and then the dog-vane, andthen ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as nearly as possible,ahab rapidly ordered the ship's course to be slightly altered, and thesail to be shortened.the acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently vindicatedat daybreak, by the sight of a long sleek on the sea directly andlengthwise ahead, smooth as oil, and resembling in the pleated waterywrinkles bordering it, the polished metallic-like marks of some swifttide-rip, at the mouth of a deep, rapid stream."man the mast-heads! call all hands!"thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the forecastledeck, daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps that theyseemed to exhale from the scuttle, so instantaneously did they appearwith their clothes in their hands."what d'ye see?" cried ahab, flattening his face to the sky."nothing, nothing sir!" was the sound hailing down in reply."t'gallant sails!_stunsails! alow and aloft, and on both sides!"all sail being set, he now cast loose the life-line, reserved forswaying him to the main royal-mast head; and in a few moments they werehoisting him thither, when, while but two thirds of the way aloft,and while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy between themain-top-sail and top-gallant-sail, he raised a gull-like cry in theair. "there she blows!_there she blows! a hump like a snow-hill! itis moby dick!"fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the threelook-outs, the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famouswhale they had so long been pursuing. ahab had now gained his finalperch, some feet above the other look-outs, tashtego standing justbeneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast, so that the indian'shead was almost on a level with ahab's heel. from this height thewhale was now seen some mile or so ahead, at every roll of the searevealing his high sparkling hump, and regularly jetting his silentspout into the air. to the credulous mariners it seemed the same silentspout they had so long ago beheld in the moonlit atlantic and indianoceans."and did none of ye see it before?" cried ahab, hailing the perchedmen all around him."i saw him almost that same instant, sir, that captain ahab did, and icried out," said tashtego."not the same instant; not the same_no, the doubloon is mine, fatereserved the doubloon for me. i only; none of ye could have raisedthe white whale first. there she blows!_there she blows!_thereshe blows! there again!_there again!" he cried, in long-drawn,lingering, methodic tones, attuned to the gradual prolongings of thewhale's visible jets. "he's going to sound! in stunsails! downtop-gallant-sails! stand by three boats. mr. starbuck, remember, stayon board, and keep the ship. helm there! luff, luff a point! so; steady,man, steady! there go flukes! no, no; only black water! all readythe boats there? stand by, stand by! lower me, mr. starbuck; lower,lower,_quick, quicker!" and he slid through the air to the deck."he is heading straight to leeward, sir," cried stubb, "right awayfrom us; cannot have seen the ship yet.""be dumb, man! stand by the braces! hard down the helm!_brace up!shiver her!_shiver her!_so; well that! boats, boats!"soon all the boats but starbuck's were dropped; all the boat-sailsset_all the paddles plying; with rippling swiftness, shooting toleeward; and ahab heading the onset. a pale, death-glimmer lit upfedallah's sunken eyes; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.like noiseless nautilus shells, their light prows sped through the sea;but only slowly they neared the foe. as they neared him, the ocean grewstill more smooth; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves; seemed anoon-meadow, so serenely it spread. at length the breathless hunter cameso nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey, that his entire dazzling humpwas distinctly visible, sliding along the sea as if an isolated thing,and continually set in a revolving ring of finest, fleecy, greenishfoam. he saw the vast, involved wrinkles of the slightly projecting headbeyond. before it, far out on the soft turkish-rugged waters, wentthe glistening white shadow from his broad, milky forehead, a musicalrippling playfully accompanying the shade; and behind, the blue watersinterchangeably flowed over into the moving valley of his steady wake;and on either hand bright bubbles arose and danced by his side. butthese were broken again by the light toes of hundreds of gay fowl softlyfeathering the sea, alternate with their fitful flight; and like tosome flag-staff rising from the painted hull of an argosy, the tallbut shattered pole of a recent lance projected from the white whale'sback; and at intervals one of the cloud of soft-toed fowls hovering, andto and fro skimming like a canopy over the fish, silently perched androcked on this pole, the long tail feathers streaming like pennons.a gentle joyousness_a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness, investedthe gliding whale. not the white bull jupiter swimming away withravished europa clinging to his graceful horns; his lovely, leeringeyes sideways intent upon the maid; with smooth bewitching fleetness,rippling straight for the nuptial bower in crete; not jove, not thatgreat majesty supreme! did surpass the glorified white whale as he sodivinely swam.on each soft side_coincident with the parted swell, that but onceleaving him, then flowed so wide away_on each bright side, the whaleshed off enticings. no wonder there had been some among the hunters whonamelessly transported and allured by all this serenity, had venturedto assail it; but had fatally found that quietude but the vesture oftornadoes. yet calm, enticing calm, oh, whale! thou glidest on, to allwho for the first time eye thee, no matter how many in that same waythou may'st have bejuggled and destroyed before.and thus, through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea, amongwaves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture, mobydick moved on, still withholding from sight the full terrors of hissubmerged trunk, entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw.but soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water; for an instanthis whole marbleized body formed a high arch, like virginia's naturalbridge, and warningly waving his bannered flukes in the air, thegrand god revealed himself, sounded, and went out of sight. hoveringlyhalting, and dipping on the wing, the white sea-fowls longingly lingeredover the agitated pool that he left.with oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails adrift, thethree boats now stilly floated, awaiting moby dick's reappearance."an hour," said ahab, standing rooted in his boat's stern; and hegazed beyond the whale's place, towards the dim blue spaces and widewooing vacancies to leeward. it was only an instant; for again his eyesseemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle. thebreeze now freshened; the sea began to swell."the birds!_the birds!" cried tashtego.in long indian file, as when herons take wing, the white birds werenow all flying towards ahab's boat; and when within a few yards beganfluttering over the water there, wheeling round and round, with joyous,expectant cries. their vision was keener than man's; ahab coulddiscover no sign in the sea. but suddenly as he peered down and downinto its depths, he profoundly saw a white living spot no bigger thana white weasel, with wonderful celerity uprising, and magnifying asit rose, till it turned, and then there were plainly revealed twolong crooked rows of white, glistening teeth, floating up from theundiscoverable bottom. it was moby dick's open mouth and scrolled jaw;his vast, shadowed bulk still half blending with the blue of the sea.the glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat like an open-doored marbletomb; and giving one sidelong sweep with his steering oar, ahab whirledthe craft aside from this tremendous apparition. then, calling uponfedallah to change places with him, went forward to the bows, andseizing perth's harpoon, commanded his crew to grasp their oars andstand by to stern.now, by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis,its bow, by anticipation, was made to face the whale's head while yetunder water. but as if perceiving this stratagem, moby dick, with thatmalicious intelligence ascribed to him, sidelingly transplanted himself,as it were, in an instant, shooting his pleated head lengthwise beneaththe boat.through and through; through every plank and each rib, it thrilled foran instant, the whale obliquely lying on his back, in the manner ofa biting shark, slowly and feelingly taking its bows full within hismouth, so that the long, narrow, scrolled lower jaw curled high up intothe open air, and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock. the bluishpearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of ahab'shead, and reached higher than that. in this attitude the white whalenow shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse. withunastonished eyes fedallah gazed, and crossed his arms; but thetiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other's heads to gain theuttermost stern.and now, while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out, as thewhale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way; and from hisbody being submerged beneath the boat, he could not be darted at fromthe bows, for the bows were almost inside of him, as it were; andwhile the other boats involuntarily paused, as before a quick crisisimpossible to withstand, then it was that monomaniac ahab, furious withthis tantalizing vicinity of his foe, which placed him all alive andhelpless in the very jaws he hated; frenzied with all this, he seizedthe long bone with his naked hands, and wildly strove to wrench it fromits gripe. as now he thus vainly strove, the jaw slipped from him; thefrail gunwales bent in, collapsed, and snapped, as both jaws, like anenormous shears, sliding further aft, bit the craft completely in twain,and locked themselves fast again in the sea, midway between the twofloating wrecks. these floated aside, the broken ends drooping, the crewat the stern-wreck clinging to the gunwales, and striving to hold fastto the oars to lash them across.at that preluding moment, ere the boat was yet snapped, ahab, the firstto perceive the whale's intent, by the crafty upraising of his head, amovement that loosed his hold for the time; at that moment his handhad made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite. but onlyslipping further into the whale's mouth, and tilting over sideways asit slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw; spilled him outof it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fell flat-faced upon the sea.ripplingly withdrawing from his prey, moby dick now lay at a littledistance, vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and down in thebillows; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindled body;so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose_some twenty or morefeet out of the water_the now rising swells, with all their confluentwaves, dazzlingly broke against it; vindictively tossing their shiveredspray still higher into the air.* so, in a gale, the but half baffledchannel billows only recoil from the base of the eddystone, triumphantlyto overleap its summit with their scud.*this motion is peculiar to the sperm whale. it receives its designation(pitchpoling) from its being likened to that preliminary up-and-downpoise of the whale-lance, in the exercise called pitchpoling, previouslydescribed. by this motion the whale must best and most comprehensivelyview whatever objects may be encircling him.but soon resuming his horizontal attitude, moby dick swam swiftly roundand round the wrecked crew; sideways churning the water in his vengefulwake, as if lashing himself up to still another and more deadly assault.the sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden him, as the blood ofgrapes and mulberries cast before antiochus's elephants in the bookof maccabees. meanwhile ahab half smothered in the foam of the whale'sinsolent tail, and too much of a cripple to swim,_though he couldstill keep afloat, even in the heart of such a whirlpool as that;helpless ahab's head was seen, like a tossed bubble which the leastchance shock might burst. from the boat's fragmentary stern, fedallahincuriously and mildly eyed him; the clinging crew, at the otherdrifting end, could not succor him; more than enough was it for them tolook to themselves. for so revolvingly appalling was the white whale'saspect, and so planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made,that he seemed horizontally swooping upon them. and though the otherboats, unharmed, still hovered hard by; still they dared not pull intothe eddy to strike, lest that should be the signal for the instantdestruction of the jeopardized castaways, ahab and all; nor in that casecould they themselves hope to escape. with straining eyes, then, theyremained on the outer edge of the direful zone, whose centre had nowbecome the old man's head.meantime, from the beginning all this had been descried from theship's mast heads; and squaring her yards, she had borne down upon thescene; and was now so nigh, that ahab in the water hailed her!_"sailon the"_but that moment a breaking sea dashed on him from mobydick, and whelmed him for the time. but struggling out of it again,and chancing to rise on a towering crest, he shouted,_"sail on thewhale!_drive him off!"the pequod's prows were pointed; and breaking up the charmed circle,she effectually parted the white whale from his victim. as he sullenlyswam off, the boats flew to the rescue.dragged into stubb's boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes, the whitebrine caking in his wrinkles; the long tension of ahab's bodilystrength did crack, and helplessly he yielded to his body's doom:for a time, lying all crushed in the bottom of stubb's boat, like onetrodden under foot of herds of elephants. far inland, nameless wailscame from him, as desolate sounds from out ravines.but this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much themore abbreviate it. in an instant's compass, great hearts sometimescondense to one deep pang, the sum total of those shallow pains kindlydiffused through feebler men's whole lives. and so, such hearts,though summary in each one suffering; still, if the gods decree it,in their life-time aggregate a whole age of woe, wholly made up ofinstantaneous intensities; for even in their pointless centres, thosenoble natures contain the entire circumferences of inferior souls."the harpoon," said ahab, half way rising, and draggingly leaning onone bended arm_"is it safe?""aye, sir, for it was not darted; this is it," said stubb, showingit."lay it before me;_any missing men?""one, two, three, four, five;_there were five oars, sir, and hereare five men.""that's good._help me, man; i wish to stand. so, so, i see him!there! there! going to leeward still; what a leaping spout!_hands offfrom me! the eternal sap runs up in ahab's bones again! set the sail;out oars; the helm!"it is often the case that when a boat is stove, its crew, being pickedup by another boat, help to work that second boat; and the chase is thuscontinued with what is called double-banked oars. it was thus now. butthe added power of the boat did not equal the added power of the whale,for he seemed to have treble-banked his every fin; swimming with avelocity which plainly showed, that if now, under these circumstances,pushed on, the chase would prove an indefinitely prolonged, if not ahopeless one; nor could any crew endure for so long a period, such anunintermitted, intense straining at the oar; a thing barely tolerableonly in some one brief vicissitude. the ship itself, then, as itsometimes happens, offered the most promising intermediate means ofovertaking the chase. accordingly, the boats now made for her, andwere soon swayed up to their cranes_the two parts of the wrecked boathaving been previously secured by her_and then hoisting everything toher side, and stacking her canvas high up, and sideways outstretchingit with stun-sails, like the double-jointed wings of an albatross; thepequod bore down in the leeward wake of moby-dick. at the well known,methodic intervals, the whale's glittering spout was regularlyannounced from the manned mast-heads; and when he would be reportedas just gone down, ahab would take the time, and then pacing the deck,binnacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second of the allotted hourexpired, his voice was heard._"whose is the doubloon now? d'ye seehim?" and if the reply was, no, sir! straightway he commanded them tolift him to his perch. in this way the day wore on; ahab, now aloft andmotionless; anon, unrestingly pacing the planks.as he was thus walking, uttering no sound, except to hail the men aloft,or to bid them hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one to a stillgreater breadth_thus to and fro pacing, beneath his slouched hat, atevery turn he passed his own wrecked boat, which had been dropped uponthe quarter-deck, and lay there reversed; broken bow to shattered stern.at last he paused before it; and as in an already over-clouded sky freshtroops of clouds will sometimes sail across, so over the old man'sface there now stole some such added gloom as this.stubb saw him pause; and perhaps intending, not vainly, though, toevince his own unabated fortitude, and thus keep up a valiant placein his captain's mind, he advanced, and eyeing the wreckexclaimed_"the thistle the ass refused; it pricked his mouth tookeenly, sir; ha! ha!""what soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck? man, man! didi not know thee brave as fearless fire (and as mechanical) i could swearthou wert a poltroon. groan nor laugh should be heard before a wreck.""aye, sir," said starbuck drawing near, "_tis a solemn sight; anomen, and an ill one.""omen? omen?_the dictionary! if the gods think to speak outrightto man, they will honourably speak outright; not shake their heads, andgive an old wives' darkling hint._begone! ye two are the oppositepoles of one thing; starbuck is stubb reversed, and stubb is starbuck;and ye two are all mankind; and ahab stands alone among the millionsof the peopled earth, nor gods nor men his neighbors! cold, cold_ishiver!_how now? aloft there! d'ye see him? sing out for everyspout, though he spout ten times a second!"the day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling.soon, it was almost dark, but the look-out men still remained unset."can't see the spout now, sir;_too dark"_cried a voice fromthe air."how heading when last seen?""as before, sir,_straight to leeward.""good! he will travel slower now _tis night. down royals andtop-gallant stun-sails, mr. starbuck. we must not run over him beforemorning; he's making a passage now, and may heave-to a while. helmthere! keep her full before the wind!_aloft! come down!_mr.stubb, send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head, and see it mannedtill morning."_then advancing towards the doubloon in themain-mast_"men, this gold is mine, for i earned it; but i shall letit abide here till the white whale is dead; and then, whosoever of yefirst raises him, upon the day he shall be killed, this gold is thatman's; and if on that day i shall again raise him, then, ten timesits sum shall be divided among all of ye! away now!_the deck is thine,sir!"and so saying, he placed himself half way within the scuttle, andslouching his hat, stood there till dawn, except when at intervalsrousing himself to see how the night wore on.chapter 134. the chase_second day.at day-break, the three mast-heads were punctually manned afresh."d'ye see him?" cried ahab after allowing a little space for thelight to spread."see nothing, sir.""turn up all hands and make sail! he travels faster than i thoughtfor;_the top-gallant sails!_aye, they should have been kept on herall night. but no matter__tis but resting for the rush."here be it said, that this pertinacious pursuit of one particular whale,continued through day into night, and through night into day, is a thingby no means unprecedented in the south sea fishery. for such is thewonderful skill, prescience of experience, and invincible confidenceacquired by some great natural geniuses among the nantucket commanders;that from the simple observation of a whale when last descried, theywill, under certain given circumstances, pretty accurately foretell boththe direction in which he will continue to swim for a time, while out ofsight, as well as his probable rate of progression during that period.and, in these cases, somewhat as a pilot, when about losing sight ofa coast, whose general trending he well knows, and which he desiresshortly to return to again, but at some further point; like as thispilot stands by his compass, and takes the precise bearing of thecape at present visible, in order the more certainly to hit arightthe remote, unseen headland, eventually to be visited: so does thefisherman, at his compass, with the whale; for after being chased, anddiligently marked, through several hours of daylight, then, when nightobscures the fish, the creature's future wake through the darknessis almost as established to the sagacious mind of the hunter, as thepilot's coast is to him. so that to this hunter's wondrous skill,the proverbial evanescence of a thing writ in water, a wake, is to alldesired purposes well nigh as reliable as the steadfast land. and as themighty iron leviathan of the modern railway is so familiarly known inits every pace, that, with watches in their hands, men time his rate asdoctors that of a baby's pulse; and lightly say of it, the up train orthe down train will reach such or such a spot, at such or such an hour;even so, almost, there are occasions when these nantucketers time thatother leviathan of the deep, according to the observed humor of hisspeed; and say to themselves, so many hours hence this whale will havegone two hundred miles, will have about reached this or that degree oflatitude or longitude. but to render this acuteness at all successfulin the end, the wind and the sea must be the whaleman's allies; forof what present avail to the becalmed or windbound mariner is the skillthat assures him he is exactly ninety-three leagues and a quarter fromhis port? inferable from these statements, are many collateral subtilematters touching the chase of whales.the ship tore on; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when acannon-ball, missent, becomes a plough-share and turns up the levelfield."by salt and hemp!" cried stubb, "but this swift motion of thedeck creeps up one's legs and tingles at the heart. this ship and iare two brave fellows!_ha, ha! some one take me up, and launch me,spine-wise, on the sea,_for by live-oaks! my spine's a keel. ha, ha!we go the gait that leaves no dust behind!""there she blows_she blows!_she blows!_right ahead!" was nowthe mast-head cry."aye, aye!" cried stubb, "i knew it_ye can't escape_blow onand split your spout, o whale! the mad fiend himself is after ye! blowyour trump_blister your lungs!_ahab will dam off your blood, as amiller shuts his watergate upon the stream!"and stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew. the frenziesof the chase had by this time worked them bubblingly up, like old wineworked anew. whatever pale fears and forebodings some of them mighthave felt before; these were not only now kept out of sight through thegrowing awe of ahab, but they were broken up, and on all sides routed,as timid prairie hares that scatter before the bounding bison. the handof fate had snatched all their souls; and by the stirring perils ofthe previous day; the rack of the past night's suspense; the fixed,unfearing, blind, reckless way in which their wild craft went plungingtowards its flying mark; by all these things, their hearts were bowledalong. the wind that made great bellies of their sails, and rushed thevessel on by arms invisible as irresistible; this seemed the symbol ofthat unseen agency which so enslaved them to the race.they were one man, not thirty. for as the one ship that held them all;though it was put together of all contrasting things_oak, and maple,and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp_yet all these ran into eachother in the one concrete hull, which shot on its way, both balanced anddirected by the long central keel; even so, all the individualities ofthe crew, this man's valor, that man's fear; guilt and guiltiness,all varieties were welded into oneness, and were all directed to thatfatal goal which ahab their one lord and keel did point to.the rigging lived. the mast-heads, like the tops of tall palms, wereoutspreadingly tufted with arms and legs. clinging to a spar with onehand, some reached forth the other with impatient wavings; others,shading their eyes from the vivid sunlight, sat far out on the rockingyards; all the spars in full bearing of mortals, ready and ripe fortheir fate. ah! how they still strove through that infinite blueness toseek out the thing that might destroy them!"why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?" cried ahab, when,after the lapse of some minutes since the first cry, no more had beenheard. "sway me up, men; ye have been deceived; not moby dick castsone odd jet that way, and then disappears."it was even so; in their headlong eagerness, the men had mistaken someother thing for the whale-spout, as the event itself soon proved; forhardly had ahab reached his perch; hardly was the rope belayed to itspin on deck, when he struck the key-note to an orchestra, that made theair vibrate as with the combined discharges of rifles. the triumphanthalloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard, as_much nearer to the shipthan the place of the imaginary jet, less than a mile ahead_moby dickbodily burst into view! for not by any calm and indolent spoutings; notby the peaceable gush of that mystic fountain in his head, did the whitewhale now reveal his vicinity; but by the far more wondrous phenomenonof breaching. rising with his utmost velocity from the furthest depths,the sperm whale thus booms his entire bulk into the pure element ofair, and piling up a mountain of dazzling foam, shows his place to thedistance of seven miles and more. in those moments, the torn, enragedwaves he shakes off, seem his mane; in some cases, this breaching is hisact of defiance."there she breaches! there she breaches!" was the cry, as in hisimmeasurable bravadoes the white whale tossed himself salmon-like toheaven. so suddenly seen in the blue plain of the sea, and relievedagainst the still bluer margin of the sky, the spray that he raised, forthe moment, intolerably glittered and glared like a glacier; andstood there gradually fading and fading away from its first sparklingintensity, to the dim mistiness of an advancing shower in a vale."aye, breach your last to the sun, moby dick!" cried ahab, "thyhour and thy harpoon are at hand!_down! down all of ye, but one man atthe fore. the boats!_stand by!"unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds, the men, likeshooting stars, slid to the deck, by the isolated backstays andhalyards; while ahab, less dartingly, but still rapidly was dropped fromhis perch."lower away," he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat_aspare one, rigged the afternoon previous. "mr. starbuck, the ship isthine_keep away from the boats, but keep near them. lower, all!"as if to strike a quick terror into them, by this time being the firstassailant himself, moby dick had turned, and was now coming for thethree crews. ahab's boat was central; and cheering his men, he toldthem he would take the whale head-and-head,_that is, pull straightup to his forehead,_a not uncommon thing; for when within a certainlimit, such a course excludes the coming onset from the whale'ssidelong vision. but ere that close limit was gained, and while yet allthree boats were plain as the ship's three masts to his eye; the whitewhale churning himself into furious speed, almost in an instant asit were, rushing among the boats with open jaws, and a lashing tail,offered appalling battle on every side; and heedless of the irons dartedat him from every boat, seemed only intent on annihilating eachseparate plank of which those boats were made. but skilfully manoeuvred,incessantly wheeling like trained chargers in the field; the boats fora while eluded him; though, at times, but by a plank's breadth; whileall the time, ahab's unearthly slogan tore every other cry but his toshreds.but at last in his untraceable evolutions, the white whale so crossedand recrossed, and in a thousand ways entangled the slack of the threelines now fast to him, that they foreshortened, and, of themselves,warped the devoted boats towards the planted irons in him; though nowfor a moment the whale drew aside a little, as if to rally for a moretremendous charge. seizing that opportunity, ahab first paid out moreline: and then was rapidly hauling and jerking in upon it again_hopingthat way to disencumber it of some snarls_when lo!_a sight moresavage than the embattled teeth of sharks!caught and twisted_corkscrewed in the mazes of the line, looseharpoons and lances, with all their bristling barbs and points, cameflashing and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of ahab's boat.only one thing could be done. seizing the boat-knife, he criticallyreached within_through_and then, without_the rays of steel;dragged in the line beyond, passed it, inboard, to the bowsman, andthen, twice sundering the rope near the chocks_dropped the interceptedfagot of steel into the sea; and was all fast again. that instant, thewhite whale made a sudden rush among the remaining tangles of the otherlines; by so doing, irresistibly dragged the more involved boats ofstubb and flask towards his flukes; dashed them together like tworolling husks on a surf-beaten beach, and then, diving down into thesea, disappeared in a boiling maelstrom, in which, for a space, theodorous cedar chips of the wrecks danced round and round, like thegrated nutmeg in a swiftly stirred bowl of punch.while the two crews were yet circling in the waters, reaching out afterthe revolving line-tubs, oars, and other floating furniture, whileaslope little flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial, twitching hislegs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks; and stubb was lustilysinging out for some one to ladle him up; and while the old man'sline_now parting_admitted of his pulling into the creamy pool torescue whom he could;_in that wild simultaneousness of a thousandconcreted perils,_ahab's yet unstricken boat seemed drawn up towardsheaven by invisible wires,_as, arrow-like, shooting perpendicularlyfrom the sea, the white whale dashed his broad forehead against itsbottom, and sent it, turning over and over, into the air; till it fellagain_gunwale downwards_and ahab and his men struggled out fromunder it, like seals from a sea-side cave.the first uprising momentum of the whale_modifying its direction ashe struck the surface_involuntarily launched him along it, to a littledistance from the centre of the destruction he had made; and with hisback to it, he now lay for a moment slowly feeling with his flukes fromside to side; and whenever a stray oar, bit of plank, the least chipor crumb of the boats touched his skin, his tail swiftly drew back, andcame sideways smiting the sea. but soon, as if satisfied that his workfor that time was done, he pushed his pleated forehead through theocean, and trailing after him the intertangled lines, continued hisleeward way at a traveller's methodic pace.as before, the attentive ship having descried the whole fight, againcame bearing down to the rescue, and dropping a boat, picked up thefloating mariners, tubs, oars, and whatever else could be caught at, andsafely landed them on her decks. some sprained shoulders, wrists, andankles; livid contusions; wrenched harpoons and lances; inextricableintricacies of rope; shattered oars and planks; all these were there;but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to have befallen any one. aswith fedallah the day before, so ahab was now found grimly clinging tohis boat's broken half, which afforded a comparatively easy float; nordid it so exhaust him as the previous day's mishap.but when he was helped to the deck, all eyes were fastened upon him; asinstead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon the shoulder ofstarbuck, who had thus far been the foremost to assist him. his ivoryleg had been snapped off, leaving but one short sharp splinter."aye, aye, starbuck, _tis sweet to lean sometimes, be the leaner whohe will; and would old ahab had leaned oftener than he has.""the ferrule has not stood, sir," said the carpenter, now coming up;"i put good work into that leg.""but no bones broken, sir, i hope," said stubb with true concern."aye! and all splintered to pieces, stubb!_d'ye see it._but evenwith a broken bone, old ahab is untouched; and i account no living boneof mine one jot more me, than this dead one that's lost. nor whitewhale, nor man, nor fiend, can so much as graze old ahab in his ownproper and inaccessible being. can any lead touch yonder floor, any mastscrape yonder roof?_aloft there! which way?""dead to leeward, sir.""up helm, then; pile on the sail again, ship keepers! down the restof the spare boats and rig them_mr. starbuck away, and muster theboat's crews.""let me first help thee towards the bulwarks, sir.""oh, oh, oh! how this splinter gores me now! accursed fate! that theunconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate!""sir?""my body, man, not thee. give me something for a cane_there, thatshivered lance will do. muster the men. surely i have not seen him yet.by heaven it cannot be!_missing?_quick! call them all."the old man's hinted thought was true. upon mustering the company, theparsee was not there."the parsee!" cried stubb_"he must have been caught in_""the black vomit wrench thee!_run all of ye above, alow, cabin,forecastle_find him_not gone_not gone!"but quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the parsee wasnowhere to be found."aye, sir," said stubb_"caught among the tangles of yourline_i thought i saw him dragging under.""my line! my line? gone?_gone? what means that little word?_whatdeath-knell rings in it, that old ahab shakes as if he were the belfry.the harpoon, too!_toss over the litter there,_d'ye see it?_theforged iron, men, the white whale's_no, no, no,_blistered fool!this hand did dart it!__tis in the fish!_aloft there! keep himnailed_quick!_all hands to the rigging of the boats_collect theoars_harpooneers! the irons, the irons!_hoist the royals higher_apull on all the sheets!_helm there! steady, steady for your life!i'll ten times girdle the unmeasured globe; yea and dive straightthrough it, but i'll slay him yet!""great god! but for one single instant show thyself," criedstarbuck; "never, never wilt thou capture him, old man_in jesus'name no more of this, that's worse than devil's madness. two dayschased; twice stove to splinters; thy very leg once more snatched fromunder thee; thy evil shadow gone_all good angels mobbing thee withwarnings:_"what more wouldst thou have?_shall we keep chasing this murderousfish till he swamps the last man? shall we be dragged by him to thebottom of the sea? shall we be towed by him to the infernal world? oh,oh,_impiety and blasphemy to hunt him more!""starbuck, of late i've felt strangely moved to thee; ever sincethat hour we both saw_thou know'st what, in one another's eyes.but in this matter of the whale, be the front of thy face to me as thepalm of this hand_a lipless, unfeatured blank. ahab is for ever ahab,man. this whole act's immutably decreed. _twas rehearsed by theeand me a billion years before this ocean rolled. fool! i am the fates'lieutenant; i act under orders. look thou, underling! that thou obeyestmine._stand round me, men. ye see an old man cut down to the stump;leaning on a shivered lance; propped up on a lonely foot. _tisahab_his body's part; but ahab's soul's a centipede, that movesupon a hundred legs. i feel strained, half stranded, as ropes thattow dismasted frigates in a gale; and i may look so. but ere i break,ye'll hear me crack; and till ye hear that, know that ahab's hawsertows his purpose yet. believe ye, men, in the things called omens? thenlaugh aloud, and cry encore! for ere they drown, drowning things willtwice rise to the surface; then rise again, to sink for evermore. sowith moby dick_two days he's floated_tomorrow will be the third.aye, men, he'll rise once more,_but only to spout his last! d'yefeel brave men, brave?""as fearless fire," cried stubb."and as mechanical," muttered ahab. then as the men went forward, hemuttered on: "the things called omens! and yesterday i talked the sameto starbuck there, concerning my broken boat. oh! how valiantly iseek to drive out of others' hearts what's clinched so fastin mine!_the parsee_the parsee!_gone, gone? and he was to gobefore:_but still was to be seen again ere i could perish_how'sthat?_there's a riddle now might baffle all the lawyers backed bythe ghosts of the whole line of judges:_like a hawk's beak it pecksmy brain. i'll, i'll solve it, though!"when dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.so once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed nearly ason the previous night; only, the sound of hammers, and the hum of thegrindstone was heard till nearly daylight, as the men toiled by lanternsin the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats and sharpeningtheir fresh weapons for the morrow. meantime, of the broken keel ofahab's wrecked craft the carpenter made him another leg; while stillas on the night before, slouched ahab stood fixed within his scuttle;his hid, heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone backward on its dial; satdue eastward for the earliest sun.chapter 135. the chase._third day.the morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more thesolitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of thedaylight look-outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar."d'ye see him?" cried ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight."in his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that's all.helm there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been going. what a lovelyday again! were it a new-made world, and made for a summer-house tothe angels, and this morning the first of its throwing open to them, afairer day could not dawn upon that world. here's food for thought,had ahab time to think; but ahab never thinks; he only feels, feels,feels; that's tingling enough for mortal man! to think's audacity.god only has that right and privilege. thinking is, or ought to be, acoolness and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor brainsbeat too much for that. and yet, i've sometimes thought my brain wasvery calm_frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass inwhich the contents turned to ice, and shiver it. and still this hair isgrowing now; this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it'slike that sort of common grass that will grow anywhere, between theearthy clefts of greenland ice or in vesuvius lava. how the wild windsblow it; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lashthe tossed ship they cling to. a vile wind that has no doubt blown erethis through prison corridors and cells, and wards of hospitals, andventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as fleeces.out upon it!_it's tainted. were i the wind, i'd blow no more onsuch a wicked, miserable world. i'd crawl somewhere to a cave, andslink there. and yet, _tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! whoever conquered it? in every fight it has the last and bitterest blow.run tilting at it, and you but run through it. ha! a coward wind thatstrikes stark naked men, but will not stand to receive a single blow.even ahab is a braver thing_a nobler thing than that. would now thewind but had a body; but all the things that most exasperate and outragemortal man, all these things are bodiless, but only bodiless as objects,not as agents. there's a most special, a most cunning, oh, a mostmalicious difference! and yet, i say again, and swear it now, thatthere's something all glorious and gracious in the wind. these warmtrade winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on, instrong and steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their mark,however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack, and mightiestmississippies of the land swift and swerve about, uncertain where to goat last. and by the eternal poles! these same trades that so directlyblow my good ship on; these trades, or something like them_somethingso unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my keeled soul along! to it!aloft there! what d'ye see?""nothing, sir.""nothing! and noon at hand! the doubloon goes a-begging! see the sun!aye, aye, it must be so. i've oversailed him. how, got the start? aye,he's chasing me now; not i, him_that's bad; i might have known it,too. fool! the lines_the harpoons he's towing. aye, aye, i have runhim by last night. about! about! come down, all of ye, but the regularlook outs! man the braces!"steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the pequod'squarter, so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the bracedship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her ownwhite wake."against the wind he now steers for the open jaw," murmured starbuckto himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail. "godkeep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the insidewet my flesh. i misdoubt me that i disobey my god in obeying him!""stand by to sway me up!" cried ahab, advancing to the hempenbasket. "we should meet him soon.""aye, aye, sir," and straightway starbuck did ahab's bidding, andonce more ahab swung on high.a whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages. time itself now heldlong breaths with keen suspense. but at last, some three points off theweather bow, ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the threemast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voicedit."forehead to forehead i meet thee, this third time, moby dick! on deckthere!_brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind's eye. he's toofar off to lower yet, mr. starbuck. the sails shake! stand over thathelmsman with a top-maul! so, so; he travels fast, and i must down. butlet me have one more good round look aloft here at the sea; there'stime for that. an old, old sight, and yet somehow so young; aye, andnot changed a wink since i first saw it, a boy, from the sand-hills ofnantucket! the same!_the same!_the same to noah as to me. there'sa soft shower to leeward. such lovely leewardings! they must leadsomewhere_to something else than common land, more palmy than thepalms. leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward,then; the better if the bitterer quarter. but good bye, good bye, oldmast-head! what's this?_green? aye, tiny mosses in these warpedcracks. no such green weather stains on ahab's head! there's thedifference now between man's old age and matter's. but aye, oldmast, we both grow old together; sound in our hulls, though, are we not,my ship? aye, minus a leg, that's all. by heaven this dead wood hasthe better of my live flesh every way. i can't compare with it; andi've known some ships made of dead trees outlast the lives of menmade of the most vital stuff of vital fathers. what's that he said?he should still go before me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again? butwhere? will i have eyes at the bottom of the sea, supposing i descendthose endless stairs? and all night i've been sailing from him,wherever he did sink to. aye, aye, like many more thou told'st direfultruth as touching thyself, o parsee; but, ahab, there thy shot fellshort. good-bye, mast-head_keep a good eye upon the whale, the whilei'm gone. we'll talk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whalelies down there, tied by head and tail."he gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily loweredthrough the cloven blue air to the deck.in due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop'sstern, ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to themate,_who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck_and bade him pause."starbuck!""sir?""for the third time my soul's ship starts upon this voyage,starbuck.""aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.""some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing,starbuck!""truth, sir: saddest truth.""some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of theflood;_and i feel now like a billow that's all one crested comb,starbuck. i am old;_shake hands with me, man."their hands met; their eyes fastened; starbuck's tears the glue."oh, my captain, my captain!_noble heart_go not_go not!_see,it's a brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasionthen!""lower away!"_cried ahab, tossing the mate's arm from him."stand by the crew!"in an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern."the sharks! the sharks!" cried a voice from the low cabin-windowthere; "o master, my master, come back!"but ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and theboat leaped on.yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, whennumbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneaththe hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time theydipped in the water; and in this way accompanied the boat with theirbites. it is a thing not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats inthose swarming seas; the sharks at times apparently following them inthe same prescient way that vultures hover over the banners of marchingregiments in the east. but these were the first sharks that had beenobserved by the pequod since the white whale had been first descried;and whether it was that ahab's crew were all such tiger-yellowbarbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses of thesharks_a matter sometimes well known to affect them,_however it was,they seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others."heart of wrought steel!" murmured starbuck gazing over the side,and following with his eyes the receding boat_"canst thou yet ringboldly to that sight?_lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, andfollowed by them, open-mouthed to the chase; and this the criticalthird day?_for when three days flow together in one continuous intensepursuit; be sure the first is the morning, the second the noon, and thethird the evening and the end of that thing_be that end what it may.oh! my god! what is this that shoots through me, and leaves me so deadlycalm, yet expectant,_fixed at the top of a shudder! future things swimbefore me, as in empty outlines and skeletons; all the past is somehowgrown dim. mary, girl! thou fadest in pale glories behind me; boy! iseem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue. strangest problems of lifeseem clearing; but clouds sweep between_is my journey's end coming?my legs feel faint; like his who has footed it all day. feel thyheart,_beats it yet? stir thyself, starbuck!_stave it off_move,move! speak aloud!_mast-head there! see ye my boy's hand on thehill?_crazed;_aloft there!_keep thy keenest eye upon the boats:_"mark well the whale!_ho! again!_drive off that hawk! see! hepecks_he tears the vane"_pointing to the red flag flying at themain-truck_"ha! he soars away with it!_where's the old man now?see'st thou that sight, oh ahab!_shudder, shudder!"the boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from themast-heads_a downward pointed arm, ahab knew that the whale hadsounded; but intending to be near him at the next rising, he held on hisway a little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crew maintainingthe profoundest silence, as the head-beat waves hammered and hammeredagainst the opposing bow."drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost headsdrive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and nohearse can be mine:_and hemp only can kill me! ha! ha!"suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; thenquickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg ofice, swiftly rising to the surface. a low rumbling sound was heard; asubterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as bedraggled withtrailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shot lengthwise,but obliquely from the sea. shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist, ithovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and then fell swamping backinto the deep. crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters flashed foran instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower offlakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round themarble trunk of the whale."give way!" cried ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forwardto the attack; but maddened by yesterday's fresh irons that corrodedin him, moby dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels thatfell from heaven. the wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading hisbroad white forehead, beneath the transparent skin, looked knittedtogether; as head on, he came churning his tail among the boats; andonce more flailed them apart; spilling out the irons and lances from thetwo mates' boats, and dashing in one side of the upper part of theirbows, but leaving ahab's almost without a scar.while daggoo and queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as thewhale swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as heshot by them again; at that moment a quick cry went up. lashed round andround to the fish's back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in which,during the past night, the whale had reeled the involutions of the linesaround him, the half torn body of the parsee was seen; his sable raimentfrayed to shreds; his distended eyes turned full upon old ahab.the harpoon dropped from his hand."befooled, befooled!"_drawing in a long lean breath_"aye,parsee! i see thee again._aye, and thou goest before; and this, thisthen is the hearse that thou didst promise. but i hold thee to the lastletter of thy word. where is the second hearse? away, mates, to theship! those boats are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, andreturn to me; if not, ahab is enough to die_down, men! the first thingthat but offers to jump from this boat i stand in, that thing iharpoon. ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obeyme._where's the whale? gone down again?"but he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with thecorpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the last encounter hadbeen but a stage in his leeward voyage, moby dick was now again steadilyswimming forward; and had almost passed the ship,_which thus far hadbeen sailing in the contrary direction to him, though for the presenther headway had been stopped. he seemed swimming with his utmostvelocity, and now only intent upon pursuing his own straight path in thesea."oh! ahab," cried starbuck, "not too late is it, even now, thethird day, to desist. see! moby dick seeks thee not. it is thou, thou,that madly seekest him!"setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled toleeward, by both oars and canvas. and at last when ahab was sliding bythe vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish starbuck's face as heleaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and followhim, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval. glancing upwards, hesaw tashtego, queequeg, and daggoo, eagerly mounting to the threemast-heads; while the oarsmen were rocking in the two staved boatswhich had but just been hoisted to the side, and were busily at work inrepairing them. one after the other, through the port-holes, as he sped,he also caught flying glimpses of stubb and flask, busying themselveson deck among bundles of new irons and lances. as he saw all this; as heheard the hammers in the broken boats; far other hammers seemed drivinga nail into his heart. but he rallied. and now marking that the vane orflag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to tashtego, who hadjust gained that perch, to descend again for another flag, and a hammerand nails, and so nail it to the mast.whether fagged by the three days' running chase, and the resistanceto his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was somelatent deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the whitewhale's way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rapidlynearing him once more; though indeed the whale's last start had notbeen so long a one as before. and still as ahab glided over the wavesthe unpitying sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciously stuck to theboat; and so continually bit at the plying oars, that the blades becamejagged and crunched, and left small splinters in the sea, at almostevery dip."heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars.pull on! _tis the better rest, the shark's jaw than the yieldingwater.""but at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!""they will last long enough! pull on!_but who can tell"_hemuttered_"whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or onahab?_but pull on! aye, all alive, now_we near him. the helm! takethe helm! let me pass,"_and so saying two of the oarsmen helped himforward to the bows of the still flying boat.at length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging alongwith the white whale's flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of itsadvance_as the whale sometimes will_and ahab was fairly within thesmoky mountain mist, which, thrown off from the whale's spout, curledround his great, monadnock hump; he was even thus close to him; when,with body arched back, and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to thepoise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into thehated whale. as both steel and curse sank to the socket, as if suckedinto a morass, moby dick sideways writhed; spasmodically rolled his nighflank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so suddenlycanted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated part of thegunwale to which he then clung, ahab would once more have been tossedinto the sea. as it was, three of the oarsmen_who foreknew not theprecise instant of the dart, and were therefore unprepared for itseffects_these were flung out; but so fell, that, in an instant two ofthem clutched the gunwale again, and rising to its level on a combingwave, hurled themselves bodily inboard again; the third man helplesslydropping astern, but still afloat and swimming.almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,instantaneous swiftness, the white whale darted through the welteringsea. but when ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns withthe line, and hold it so; and commanded the crew to turn round on theirseats, and tow the boat up to the mark; the moment the treacherous linefelt that double strain and tug, it snapped in the empty air!"what breaks in me? some sinew cracks!__tis whole again; oars!oars! burst in upon him!"hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeledround to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that evolution,catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship; seemingly seeingin it the source of all his persecutions; bethinking it_it may be_alarger and nobler foe; of a sudden, he bore down upon its advancingprow, smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead. "i grow blind; hands!stretch out before me that i may yet grope my way. is't night?""the whale! the ship!" cried the cringing oarsmen."oars! oars! slope downwards to thy depths, o sea, that ere it be forever too late, ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark! i see:the ship! the ship! dash on, my men! will ye not save my ship?"but as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through thesledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planksburst through, and in an instant almost, the temporarily disabled boatlay nearly level with the waves; its half-wading, splashing crew, tryinghard to stop the gap and bale out the pouring water.meantime, for that one beholding instant, tashtego's mast-head hammerremained suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him aswith a plaid, then streamed itself straight out from him, as his ownforward-flowing heart; while starbuck and stubb, standing upon thebowsprit beneath, caught sight of the down-coming monster just as soonas he."the whale, the whale! up helm, up helm! oh, all ye sweet powersof air, now hug me close! let not starbuck die, if die he must, in awoman's fainting fit. up helm, i say_ye fools, the jaw! the jaw! isthis the end of all my bursting prayers? all my life-long fidelities?oh, ahab, ahab, lo, thy work. steady! helmsman, steady. nay, nay! uphelm again! he turns to meet us! oh, his unappeasable brow drives ontowards one, whose duty tells him he cannot depart. my god, stand by menow!""stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will nowhelp stubb; for stubb, too, sticks here. i grin at thee, thou grinningwhale! who ever helped stubb, or kept stubb awake, but stubb's ownunwinking eye? and now poor stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that isall too soft; would it were stuffed with brushwood! i grin at thee, thougrinning whale! look ye, sun, moon, and stars! i call ye assassins ofas good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost. for all that, i would yetring glasses with ye, would ye but hand the cup! oh, oh! oh, oh! thougrinning whale, but there'll be plenty of gulping soon! why fly yenot, o ahab! for me, off shoes and jacket to it; let stubb die inhis drawers! a most mouldy and over salted death, though;_cherries!cherries! cherries! oh, flask, for one red cherry ere we die!""cherries? i only wish that we were where they grow. oh, stubb, i hopemy poor mother's drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers willnow come to her, for the voyage is up."from the ship's bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive;hammers, bits of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained intheir hands, just as they had darted from their various employments;all their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, which from side toside strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent a broad band ofoverspreading semicircular foam before him as he rushed. retribution,swift vengeance, eternal malice were in his whole aspect, and spite ofall that mortal man could do, the solid white buttress of his foreheadsmote the ship's starboard bow, till men and timbers reeled. somefell flat upon their faces. like dislodged trucks, the heads of theharpooneers aloft shook on their bull-like necks. through the breach,they heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume."the ship! the hearse!_the second hearse!" cried ahab from theboat; "its wood could only be american!"diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along itskeel; but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, faroff the other bow, but within a few yards of ahab's boat, where, for atime, he lay quiescent."i turn my body from the sun. what ho, tashtego! let me hear thyhammer. oh! ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncrackedkeel; and only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm,and pole-pointed prow,_death-glorious ship! must ye then perish, andwithout me? am i cut off from the last fond pride of meanest shipwreckedcaptains? oh, lonely death on lonely life! oh, now i feel my topmostgreatness lies in my topmost grief. ho, ho! from all your furthestbounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole foregone life,and top this one piled comber of my death! towards thee i roll, thouall-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last i grapple with thee;from hell's heart i stab at thee; for hate's sake i spit my lastbreath at thee. sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool!and since neither can be mine, let me then tow to pieces, while stillchasing thee, though tied to thee, thou damned whale! thus, i give upthe spear!"the harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with ignitingvelocity the line ran through the grooves;_ran foul. ahab stoopedto clear it; he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him round theneck, and voicelessly as turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he wasshot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone. next instant, theheavy eye-splice in the rope's final end flew out of the stark-emptytub, knocked down an oarsman, and smiting the sea, disappeared in itsdepths.for an instant, the tranced boat's crew stood still; then turned."the ship? great god, where is the ship?" soon they through dim,bewildering mediums saw her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseousfata morgana; only the uppermost masts out of water; while fixed byinfatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once lofty perches, thepagan harpooneers still maintained their sinking lookouts on the sea.and now, concentric circles seized the lone boat itself, and all itscrew, and each floating oar, and every lance-pole, and spinning, animateand inanimate, all round and round in one vortex, carried the smallestchip of the pequod out of sight.but as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over thesunken head of the indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of theerect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards of the flag,which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the destroyingbillows they almost touched;_at that instant, a red arm and a hammerhovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the act of nailingthe flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar. a sky-hawk thattauntingly had followed the main-truck downwards from its natural homeamong the stars, pecking at the flag, and incommoding tashtego there;this bird now chanced to intercept its broad fluttering wing between thehammer and the wood; and simultaneously feeling that etherial thrill,the submerged savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept his hammer frozenthere; and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic shrieks, and hisimperial beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive form folded in theflag of ahab, went down with his ship, which, like satan, would not sinkto hell till she had dragged a living part of heaven along with her, andhelmeted herself with it.now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen whitesurf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the greatshroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.epilogue "and i only am escaped alone to tell thee" job.the drama's done. why then here does any one step forth?_because onedid survive the wreck.it so chanced, that after the parsee's disappearance, i was he whomthe fates ordained to take the place of ahab's bowsman, when thatbowsman assumed the vacant post; the same, who, when on the last day thethree men were tossed from out of the rocking boat, was dropped astern.so, floating on the margin of the ensuing scene, and in full sight ofit, when the halfspent suction of the sunk ship reached me, i was then,but slowly, drawn towards the closing vortex. when i reached it, it hadsubsided to a creamy pool. round and round, then, and ever contractingtowards the button-like black bubble at the axis of that slowly wheelingcircle, like another ixion i did revolve. till, gaining that vitalcentre, the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by reason ofits cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising with greatforce, the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea, fell over, andfloated by my side. buoyed up by that coffin, for almost one whole dayand night, i floated on a soft and dirgelike main. the unharming sharks,they glided by as if with padlocks on their mouths; the savage sea-hawkssailed with sheathed beaks. on the second day, a sail drew near, nearer,and picked me up at last. it was the devious-cruising rachel, that inher retracing search after her missing children, only found anotherorphan.